id: 88213eb2e1
标题：Hong Kong Interviews: Informant No. 26
日期：1980-4-6
是否是时间段：false
作者：Andrew G. Walder
来源：
标签：文章
书籍：Hong Kong Interviews: Informant No. 26
书籍作者：Andrew G. Walder

正文：
INFORMANT NO. 26PERSONAL DATA

Sex:FemaleAge:43Education: Technical school graduate

25Total Years Relevant Experience:

.Last Year of Relevant Experience: l979

Year Left China:1979Initial Immigration Status:LegalNative Place/Overseas Connections:Shantou native/husband Thai OSClass Background/Political Designation:

unknown

OCCUPATIONAL HISTORY SUMMARYPositions Held: l) Staff technician, Technical Department, Harbin Electric

Machinery Factory, 1956-592) Staff technician, Technical Department of Prototype

Plant, Canton Machine Tools Research Institute, l959-79Administrative Level of Work Unit/(No. of employees):

1) probably Ministry/(l0,000+)

2) Ministry until 1972, later Municipal/(1000)Experience in Full-time Manual Labor (for non-worker occupations):

none mentionedAPPOINTMENTS:1

.TOTAL HOURS: 2.5

PAGES TEXT:3No.26Occupational History(4/6/80, 2.5 hrs.)

The informant is originally from Guangdong, in a village near Shantou,on the seacoast. When she graduated from lower middle school she wantedto serve industrialization, as did 80% of her classmates.They all tookthe national exam to enter technical middle school.They all wanted toget out of the village.This was in l952.SShe passed, and went on tostudy machine building at a technical school in Changchun, Jilin.Shestudied here for 3 years, graduating in l956. Then she was assigned toan electrical machinery factory in Harbin.SShe was a technician therein the technical (gongyi) department from 1956-59.

In l959 she was transfered with her husband to the Canton MachineTools Research Institute.There she worked also in the technology depart-ment, in the plant under the research institute which made prototypemachine teols.Her job was to take the design drawings and draw up plansfor producing the parts from raw materials.The result was a series oftechnical cards (gongyi kapian).

The steps for each process from rawmaterials to finished parts would be specified on each card, along withspecifications, processing methods, tools to use, raw materials to be used.So she would take the designs and break them down into a planned productionsequence.She worked here until 1979, when she emigrated legally to HongKong.Wages

When she graduated in April l956, she was given a work point designa-tion of l34 fen, with each point work X amount of yuan.She got 32¥.Atthe end of l956 they shifted to a system of technical grades, and she wasthen an assistant technician, grade 15, and got 44¥. In the 1956 wagereform they set out a 'practice' (jianxi) period of one year, after which

So in April 1957 was zhuanzhengyou would be 'made regular' (zhuanzheng).to 5o. After she went to Canton she was given a regional readjustment to55¥,but was still grade l4. In l963 she was raised a grade to 13 and becamea full-fledged technician, at 6l¥. Then in 1977 she was raised to 68, grade12.

In 1963 she got thee raise because she hadn't had a raise since the1956 reform.In l977 she was also raised because she hadn't gotten a raisein l4 years.

There were other readjustments:  in l959, mostly for workers andvery few administrative and technical cadres.  There was no mass discussion,they just gave raises, but a small number overall.TThis is the only otherreadjustment she remembers.There was no readjustment during the culturalrevolution and ensuing period.Bonuses

In Harbin during the l950s they had bonuses for workers but not forstaff. These were based on overfulfilling targets, attendance, etc.Thiswas every month.They also had bonuses in the research institute for theworkers but not for the technicians.:It was cancelled during the CR.In1977, at the very end of the year, they began quarterly and year-end bonusesfor both workers and technical staff. They were divided into 3 grades.Temporary and Contract Workers

There were none in her plant during 1956-59. The plant was large,and growing fast. TThey had a lot of apprentices--over 2oo were beingtrained at that time, but did not use temporary labor of any sort.

-1-Firings, Discipline

If a worker was doing a poor job, they would talk to him give himcriticismn (piping), or send him to a study group (xuexi ban).The studygroup wass for people'who did work poorly.They went to these groups forpolitical education full time, and were docked 30% of their wages.Duringthe 'blooming and contending' (daming dafang) period of 1956 (she probablymeans l957), the workers criticized this practice as being a warehouse ofspare workers, which in practice it actually was, since workers seemed togo in and out based on whether they needed workers.The system wascancelled after thee'bloomingandcontending'(criticisms.

There were no firings that she heard of during the 1956-59 period,but workers would be penalized for bad work by missing out on bonuses andraises.  Some few were arrested and taken awayfor political or lifestyleproblems, and did labor reform.

But generally you can't just fire a worker..Harbin Electrical Machinery Plant, 1956-59

There were over lo,ooo workers and staff.The products were water-poweredelectrical generators (shuili dianfa ji), and also normal sized electricalmotors.During this period they used the Soviet system--'one-man maagement'(yizhang zhi).Theyhad an 'experts office' (zhuanjia bangongshi), fullof Russian technical specialists.The plant in fact was built with Sovietassistance, and in fact was enlarged from smaller plants which had beenin existence earlier.

The plant was divided into about l4 shops.There was a plant director,many assistant directors, and a large group of 'director's assistants'(changzhang zhuli).There was a designing department, a technical (gongyi)department, a quality inspection department (jiancha ke), the experts office,a personnel department, an organizational department, an educational department(for technical education and literacy campaigns).

There were quite a numberof other departments, but she doesn't remember clearly because she was atechnician and it was such a large plant.

Her technical department had about l60 staff members.Therewasonedepartment head and 3 vice-heads, one branch party secretary and one unioncadre.They were divided into different groups (zu).SShe worked in thetool designing group (gongju shiji zu)， about 26 or so people, about 18of which did industrial designing, and another 5-6 or so did copyingand tracing of the original drawings.TThis was also a unit for political

Study was led by the group leader or the union cadre.Politicalstudy.study was irregular then, and not much emphasized.They had enlarged meetingsof the department more often.

They also had an equipment group, a materialsquota group, and a few others based on type of product.

All the groups had group0leaders and two vice-leaders, and one unionleader (gonghui zuzhang).

The groupohead was an engineer.He handled thework plans, and according to the work assignments of the group would arrangework assignments and quotas for each person.He would hold meetings aboutthe tasks of the group and would assign tasks to people based on his assess-ment of their abilities.He also checked over the work of each individualand was responsible fr mistakes in designs if they left the group.Anti-Rightist Campaign, 1957

In l957， they first had the loo flowers, the 'blooming and contending'.Later came the anti-rightist campaign.

During this campaign a lot of tech-nicians were criticized, and they largely had made the mistake of complainingabout the treatment of intellectuals, the leadership of the party over them,and the PartyI cadre's lack of technical ability.

At that time these expertscould usuallyI read foreign languages like Russian, and could get money for

-2-translations by working at night.Great Leap Forward

They sent groups of staff workers down to do manual labor in shops,about 20-25% of the members of her department went at any one time.  Theywere sent for fixed periods of one year to the shops.SShe was sent to thetool shop which used the drawings her group made.She operated machinetools.1After 3 months, however, she was transfered.  She went to do labor withthis second group at the middle of l959, but after these 3 nonths she wentto her new unit in Canton and never finished her one year stint.

Even though a good proportion of the staff was being sent to the shops,they could still finish their designing responsibilities because they workedovertime frequently and also on their days off. So they did pick up theslack.They did not get overtime pay for this, but the workers did.They also had the 'da lian gang'（steel-making） movement.They pulleda number of people out from other jobs to work on this.

Small_group management:Before the Great Leap the small groups hadonly a group leader and vice-leader, and a union leader (gonghui zhang).These 3 people handled most of the jobs that the'8 personnel'(ba ^a yuan)were supposed to do later.1Her group had this new system--shenghuo yuan,zhiliang yuan, kaoqin yuan, etc.This was a new thing.

Some groupshandledthis well， some didn't.Some had appointed these 'yuan', but they in realitydidn't do any real work most of the time, just had this name.Other groupsstrictly adhered to their responsibilities.((The implication here is thatshe views this not as participation in management but as a 'responsibilitysystem').

They really emphasized this system in Harbin during the Great Leap.

Butthe group she was in was full of older workers from before l949, and theybasically :ignored the political studyand 'ba da yuan'system.In fact itwas still like the 'yizhang zhi'(thee 'one leader system', or 'one-man manage-ment') within the group, with the group leader handling all the tasks whichwere supposed to be done by the worker'yuan'.

Results of the Great Leap:SSince their factory was not a largebatch production plant, and produced large machines to order, there was aproblem with quality because they were turning out these large machinesat a faster rate.They did not carry out quality inspection with verymuch strictness.With the 'downward transfer of powers' (quanli xiafang):quality control powers were sent dow to the shops and the shops thensacrificed quality to.meet the demands for greatly increased production.But generally speaking, her plant was modern and very orderly, and hadfixed processes of production and was not thrown into too much disorderduring the Great Leap, but some smaller factories really were disrupted.

-3-

描述：

