id: 8786dd5c6c
标题：Hong Kong Interviews: Informant No. 38
日期：1980-5-10
是否是时间段：false
作者：Andrew G. Walder
来源：
标签：文章
书籍：Hong Kong Interviews: Informant No. 38
书籍作者：Andrew G. Walder

正文：
INFORMANT NO. 38PERSONALDATA

Sex: MaleAge:39Education:

technical school graduateTotal Years Relevant Experience:16Last Year of Relevant Experience: l978

Year Left China: 1978Initial Immigration Status:IllegalNative Place/overseas Connections:Canton native/os ties unknownClass Background/Political Designation:

unknown

OCCUPATIONALHISTORYSUMMARYPositions Held: 1) Worker, Coal Company, Guangdong, l963-65

2) Worker, Machinery Repair Collective, Canton, 1965-78Administrative Level of Work Unit/(No. of employees):

1)unknown2) Municipal district, collective/(l0-l20, grew over years)

PAGES TEXT:APPOINTMENTS:1

TOTAL HOURS: 2.5

3No.38Occupational History (5/l0/80, 2.5 hrs.)

The informant studied mathematics at a Canton technical middle school,and graduated in l963 at the age of 22.HHe was assigned to work at acoal bureau in an out-of-the-way area of Guangdong, but after two yearshe tired of this and felt he was toofar away from home.SSohelefthisjob of his own accord, but was not given a second job assignment--thiswas the regular practice.In l965, a friend of his who had good relationswith a party branch secretary at a factory used hiss ganging to get himwork.

This was a plant which repaired machinery of various sorts--aircompressors, winches, drill presses, lathes.:It wascalleda'comprehensiverepair plant' (zonghe xiuli chang).The plant was a small collectiveunder the administration of the district (qu), and was under the municipalindustrial bureau.

When hefirst came tothe plant it hadonlyaboutl0people in all.He worked at this plant until he left in l978, when hecame to Hong Kong illegally.

The plant developed over the years， and by the time he left it had astaff of over l20, but was still a collective.As it grew in size, itstasks changed. EFirst it switched to repairing only larger machines,and later it was instailing cabs onto trucks for hauling goods, the chassisalready having been assembled at another plant.  Afterwards, it was sent toanother plant for finishing.

The other plant was state-owned.This was actually "half state-owmed"by the time he left, because after they started production they didn't haveto go out and buy their own materials and spare parts, or market the goods.They had fixed relations and contracts with state plants.All their materialswere supplied by the state.About half of their equipment was alsosuppliedby the state, and they had fixed quotas of finished jobs to give to the nextfactory in the production process.

He was a worker, but after one year in the plant he started working ina 'technical innovation group' (jishu gexin zu).This group solved repairand overhaulproblems with the machinery and equipment, and made designs andpreparations for the production of new products.

They finally ended repairoperations in l966-67 or so, and went into truck assembly a few years after.The product was always changing.the proportion of work in certain productschanging, and the plant was in a continual stateeof flux as it grew.

So he did the work of a technician, including drawing diagrams, repairingthings and raking prototypes for new products.  But he was not a technicianin title or grade.The work was very flexible, and always changing.Wages

When he first came to the plant, they used a system where they dividedpeople into points (fen) according to their technical ability and the typeof work they did.They went from 5 fen to lo fen.

Thenattheendofthemonth, they would take the total profit， divide by1 the total number of fenin the plant, to derive the worth of each fen, and then gave each person theamount given their rating.

In l969, they switched to a fixed wage system.

The transfer wasmade as follows:  According to your point rating, they figures out whatyour average monthly wage was during the previous year, then that became yourfixed monthly wage.If a new worker came, they first went to talk with thebranch party secretary, to find out what experience and technical level hehad, and fix his wage on that basis, and also taking into considerationyour family situation and need.  This was usually about 2o+.  There was an

-1-experienced worker in the plant who got over 80. That was the highestofanybody.There were no fixed scales or grades.when he first startedwork， the informant got 30+¥.After they fixed the wages in 1969， hegot 54￥, with no raises thereafter.

His wages did not change for lo years.Bonuses

They had bonuses up until the CR, when they abolished and had none.Then they restored them again in l977. The bonus system, when they had it,wass run like this:tthere was a proportion of profit set aside each monthand not distributed as basic wage.A work group with good performance wouldbe given an amount of money to distribute in proportion to the person'swage level. A collective group bonus.:They used the same method bothbeforetheCRandafter 1977.Employment

There were no contract or temporary workers in this plant. All workerswere the same status.There was no unit which assigned workers to theirplant.They just came looking for work, and used the introductions offriends. There was never anyone fired. They did, however, deduct wagesfor strikingly bad performances.This was up to the group leader's discretion.Organization of the Plant

Near the end of his stay there, when the plant was producing trucks,the plant was organized as follows.  At the top, they had a branch partysecretary, and 3 members of a party branch committee. They had a directorand vice-director of the plant.The plant director was also the partysecretary. The vice-director was also a party member. There was norevolutionary committee.In the plant director's office, they had someonehandling political work, welfare, 2 people.

There were 3 shops.One made the cowling for the engine and thefront fenders.The second shop made the cab.iThe third was the metalworking shop, where they had bellows, small furnaces, lathes, etc.Therewas a shop director, vice-director, in each shop, but no other staff.The shops were divided into groups (banzu), which varied in size from 3-l0+people.These were led by group leaders.  These were people that the leadersof the plant trusted--not necessarily because they had leadership or tech-nical ability.TThey didn't always have these characteristics.

They werenot mostly party members :either--this didn't matter that much.  They wereappointed by the top leaders.The jobof the group leader was to arrangethe day's work, give work assignments and transfer persornel where needed.There were no fixed person to help him.  But there were people who voluntarilyhelped on an informal basis, based on whether or not they had good1ganqingwith the group leader.They would be turned to for advice on work assignmentsidecisions about how to produce something, whether or not to overhaul a machine,etc.They had meetings of various sizes--in groups, shops, entire plant,depending on the need.They had several departments (gu)--production (3 people),technology (4 people), ffinance (2 people).  Under the production departmentwas his own technical reform group.:It was under production departmentleadership.His group had seven people in it.Cultural Revolution

When the CR began, the influence on production was not that great,but shortly thereafter no one really ran things, and production slowed downfor a period of l-2 years.The workers in his plant did not form organizationsof their own, and there were no real activities within the plant.?Theleaders

-2-were not criticized and were still in power after the CR. But some--not many--participated in city-wide organizations and did not come to workfor long periods.  But there were a few changes in the leading group, sinceright after the CR a few new leaders were transfered in by the district.The only people who were criticized were those who went out to partici-pate in other mass organizations.After they came back, at the end of theCR, they were criticized for struggling and violence. Also at the sametime they criticized some people for mistakes they had committed in thepast, like permitting people to go to HK, or stealing things, or doingbusiness with the plant's goods.

After the CR, there was a period of serious problems with work activism.This was from the end of the CR to about 1977.Not until l978 did thingsget better.This was during the period when they fixed wages. This was alsoin part because people wanted to go to other factories but could not gettransfered. By 'daigong' (loafing), he means that people will drag out a jobmuch longer than the time required to finish it, and would be 'sick' and gosee a doctor, and would leave the plant early.

They had a PLA propaganda team there for a while to "propagate Maothought", check and see if there was any corruption based on examinationof plant accounts, get to know the workers, find out who made mistakes,criticize a selected group of workers who would be sent to the country-side.  If they found someone had made a mistake, they would collect materialsand hold a meeting.When the PLA first came, the leading group in the plantdidn't have real power.  The PLA held onto power when they were there. Theywere at the plant for about one year. Before the PLA teamncametheoldleaderswere not exercising power, were not doing leadership work, were just passive(beimian), because they feared criticism and removal.TThejobofthePLAwas to turn this situation around. There were four soldiers in this groupin all. They also led political study meetings, where they would studydocuments, Mao's writings, and teach about class enemies.

一3一

描述：

