id: 8a44ab3bb8
标题：Hong Kong Interviews: Informant No. 32
日期：1980-4-28
是否是时间段：false
作者：Andrew G. Walder
来源：
标签：文章
书籍：Hong Kong Interviews: Informant No. 32
书籍作者：Andrew G. Walder

正文：
INFORMANT NO. 32PERSONAL DATA

Sex:MaleAge:26Education:

upper middle school

7Total Years Relevant Experience:

Year Left China;1978Last Year of Relevant Experience: 1978Initial Immigration Status:Legal

Hong Kong native, returned 1958 w/fatherNative Place/overseas Connections:

OS, workerClass Background/Political Designation:

OCCUPATIONAL HISTORY SUMMARYPositions Held:  l) Fitter, Boat Repair Dock, Canton Petroleum Transport

Company, 1972-78Administrative Level of Work Unit/(No. of employees) :

1) Province Commercial Department/(l00+)

TOTAL HOURS:  2,5

PAGES TEXT:4APPOINTMENTS:1No.32OccupationalHistory(4/28/80, 2.5 hrs.)

The informant worked as a skilled worker in the repair shop of theCanton Petroleum Transport Company;

January 1972 to January 1978. Hewas born in Hong Kong, and moved to Canton with his father in l958. Heand his father both later applied to come out to Hong Kong, and succeeded.The informant arrived in Hong Kongin Februaryl978.

His work unit was under the Guangdong Provincial Commercial Department(shangye ju).Below the commercial department were several companies, andhis was the petroleum company, which was responsible for the transport anddistribution of oil to various production units in the province.Therewereno production units under the company, but they did have transport teams andrepair plants. He worked in the repair plant (xiupei chang).

They repairedships, barges, and other boats used by the water transport team of thecompany.They were responsible for the maintenance and repair of ships,regular inspections6 at fixed intervals, etc.This included both major overhaulsand minor repairs.

He graduated from middle school in l97l, and avoided being sent down tothe countryside because he was the eldest son and permitted parents toprotect l child from rustication.

He was chosen by his parents to stay.So he waited 6 months before beingg assigned to work in a plant as a fitter.They did most types of repair work except welding.

Theplantaltogetiierhad a little over lo0 workers.They were very busy, even though peoplewere few, because there were always repairs to do. During this period he wentto two different plants for shipbuiiding in Canton for 5 months to studytechnical matters, how to do simple designing, how to measure the thicknessof steel plates, etc. After returning he actually did the work of anassistant technician, but in fact he did not have that title.Wages

When he first entered the plant, he was 'on trial' (shiyong) for a periodof six months, during which his wages were 24¥.  After six months he was elevatedto grade l worker, 38.5￥.  In his fourth year he was raised according to fixedrules to grade 2 at 45.5¥. He says that in other plant there is a 3-yearapprenticeship period before you are changed to grade l.  when he got thislast raise it was due to fixed regulations and had nothing to do with awage readjustment.

There was a readjustment in l972, right after he started working, andthen another one around 1975-77, but he can't remember clearly.1But he thinksit was before Deng was knocked down in l976 because at that time they werepreparing for wage readjustments.In l972 the criteria was number of yearsof work.If you worked from before l957 but were stillLgrade3you wereeraisedto grade 4.  If you started before l960 and were still grade 2 you wouldbecome grade 3.  If you started before 1969 and were still grade l you becamegrade 2.

The second readjustment was different. It was according to workcontri-bution, and also according to years of service. So they set years of serviceguidelines, but not everyone got raises.They would select only those amongthem who had the best work attitudes.Bonuses

They restored the bonus system around 1973 or 1974, but did not haveone when he started working.TThey had yearly, quarterly, and monthly bonuses.About 60% of the employees could get a bonus each time. Grade l was 8¥,

-1-grade 2， 6¥， and grade 3，4¥.The groups would meet once a month toappraise for bonuses.?The conditions--attendance, number of leaves,promptness in reporting for work, work activism, not causing damage orloss due to mistakes or accidents, and waste levels.Also）'unity' withotherworkers..Also for the young workers, if you got married early, youcould have bonuses taken away.1Also there were conditions related tothe number of children and their spacing for the married workers.Butwork performance was the most important condition.

When they first started, they didn't dare give money--they gavetowels and other things. But after a year or so they switched to money.because people already had a log of these things in their homes.  whenhe visited Canton during the Spring Festival this year, they had returnedto the 'baogong' system of pre-CR days, and he heard that incomes had increasedgreatly and that people were working much faster now.Punishments, Firings

They hadone leadingcadre sent toa rural area because of illicitsexual relations. This was internal Party discipline.?They also hada worker who stole things and then sold them.HHe was kicked out of theParty.?There were no other demotions or firings.Worker Discipline and Motivation

The wage conditions didn't make any difference for some people.  Butothers were dissatisfied, especially those who had been stuck for a lcngtime at the same wages.Also those who felt that the raises of l972 and1975 or so were not tied to work performance.There were also others ofhigher grades who might be dissatisfied.

So they were less active, andwere not willing to study business or technology at night because therewas no use in the future in terms of wages or promotions.

Some workers who had real economic hardships in their family as aresult of the wage situation could get supplements if their per capitaincome in the family had dropped below a certain level over the years,or if the worker was sick.1But this was hard to get approved by theleader of the small group.Administrationand Leadershipinthe Repair Plant

They had a "revolutionary leadership group"(geming lingdao xiaozu).The leading member was the plant director, who was paid at the nationallevel for a department head.This was below the leadership of thecompany's revolutionary committee,head, who was equivalent to a bureaudepartment (chu) head, or a plant director of a smaller plant.Thisrevolutionary leading group had five members.The head was appointed bythe company head.  The vice-heads were also assigned by the company withthe discussion of the RC of the company. Two others were elected demo-cratically, at the time of the establishment of the RC during the culturalrevolution.

Election preconditions: :First, you had to be a party member.sSecond,the existing 3 members of the leading group would select five of the 20 or somembers of the Party in the plant as candidates. Third, they then usedsecreat ballots throughout the unit to select.The two with the most voteswouldbeelected.This was done one time a year.You could also votefor another Party member in the plant if you didn't like the 5 on the list.Fourth, the electees were subject to approval by the revolutionary committeeof the company, which scrutinized their files for mistakes.1It did happenthat people were disqualified at this step. Fifth, these people, in additionto the other 3, could be removed and sent to different jobs if they did poor

-2-work. But this never happened. But they did have a leader transfered becauseof illicit sexual relations.

These five leaders were responsible for overseeing the entire operation.The head oversaw the whole process.

He handled some welfare and housingmatters, approved expenditures under 3oo, and decided larger questions,and helped solve conflicts.One vice-head handled 'revolution', and onehandled production.  "Revolution" meant ideological and political work.He led the campaigns and oversaw study, and made sure that workers' activismon the job was sufficient. TThe production leader oversaw carrying outof repairs andathe completion of contracts andorders.He distributed workfor each group0to perform, and madee sure they completed them.The remainingtwo members have divided up between them various welfare and cultural

They also helped workers write articles during campaigns andactivities.after criticism meetings.

Thefirst3leaders6 are paid according to the administrative cadrescales.The last 2 are paid according to worker scales, even though theyare non-production and do cadre work.Under this leadership groupthey had a carpentry group, boat repair group, electricians group, alogistics group, andAa machine tools group.

The logistics group was respon-sible for the supply of materials, supplies and spare parts, and also forhandling of wages, some welfare matters, especially the canteen.

They hadfour trucks for getting the needed supplies, buying them, and bringing themin.The logistics group had the leadership group as its core, and the otherswere workers--four cooks, 5 designers, one warehouseman, and a few oti:ers.But all were considered workers.

The other groups had production tasks, and had group leaders andvice-leaders, all party members.]If they were not party members then theywould be party members on trial (houbu) for the first year.

Informant worked in the ship repair group, over 4o workers.Since thegroup was large, they decided to choose a leading small group within the groupof4-55 workers with the highest technical levels.This was flexible, andpeopl- were constantly being shifted in and out of it as work progressed.They were selected by the group leader, who also gave out work assignmentsfor different workers in the group.

The group0leadersandvice-leader

The other members of the leading smallhandled the statistics and records.group within his group were the temporary heads of small work teams assignedto do：Specific tasks on a continually shifting basis.

They also had some workers, non-party members but with long exper-ience, to be safetyinspectors.Theyusedthembothbeforeandafter-shift

All meetings, study, and criticismto do inspecting of completed repairs.sessions were held during the hour of rest at the middle of the day.

Thiswas during regular periods.During a particularly important campaign, theywould use work time to hold study meetings or write wallposters, for examplethree afternoons a week.

This occurred during the PiLin Pi Kong, and the "anti rightist reversalof verdicts " ccampaign held after the Tiananmen incident, which includedcriticisms of Deng Xiaoping.1Production suffered according to the amountof work time used up in meetings.:Sometimess they would work overtime inthe evenings to make up for lost time.They would get overtime pay for thisaccording to hours they worked, and also overtime supplements.They had tomake up for lost time usually because others were waiting on their repairs,sometimes foreign shipping companies.The general effect of the biggcampaignswas tolengthenthe amount of time required tofinishajob.

He says he returned to Canton over Spring Festival this year, and that

They don't waste work timethings have changed completely in this respect.

-3-in campaigns and study anymore.Factions

There were no real factional problems in his unit by the time he cameor at any time.There were problems during the CR but these had disappearedby l972. No cadres were criticized during his experience. They did haveinternal party discipline and criticism meetings, though.  These wereclosed party meetings.They could not participate in these, or hear internalparty reports, as for example right after the Lin Biao incident.Meetings

They had 3 meetings, one hour before work, each week. About l-2 timesa week these turned into mutual criticism sessions for fighting, arguing,poor work attitudes, etc. This was the small group "mutual supervision"system, and it was quite useful.

描述：

