id: fbeee02cb0
标题：Hong Kong Interviews: Informant No. 71
日期：1983-9-28,1983-10-4,1983-10-11,1983-10-18,1983-11-1,1983-11-15,1984-2-8
是否是时间段：false
作者：Andrew G. Walder
来源：
标签：文章
书籍：Hong Kong Interviews: Informant No. 71
书籍作者：Andrew G. Walder

正文：
No. 7l (New York)Background: (9/28/83, 2 hrs.)

He graduated from 1ower middle school in 197l, at the age of 16,in Peking.EBecause he satisfied the family requirements (only son),he was able to avoid being sent down tothe countryside.Hewassent to Beijing No.2 Agricultural Chemicals Plant,in the suburbs.The plant had well over 1,0oo employees, was state-owned and underthe administration of the Beijing Municipal Chemicals Bureau.'The plantproduced chemicals of several varieties that were used in agriculture,but did not produce chemical fertilizer. It produced insecticides,for example, and also caustic soda. He worked in the shop that producedcausticsoda.He worked in the plant until late 1977, when he hadan opportunity for a transfer.During his years in the factory hestudiedenglish withanacquaintance who had adegree from Yale before1949.BEnglish skills were in very short supply by 1977.SSo he wastransfered to a products research institute in the bureau in late 1977,after making contact with someone who knew a headhunter working forthebureaulookingforanenglishtranslator.AAfter a year in theresearch institute, he took the national college entrance exam andpassed. He went to Beijing No. 2 Foreign Languages Institute, andeventually got permission to come to the U.S. to study.ShopOrganization

The shop was divided into sections (gongxu) along functional lines.Theshophadabout1o0people.There was a section for dissolvingthe industrial salts into a solution (huayan),then the material wentto another section for electrolysis, which separated the salt from thealkaline (dianjie), then the salt solution was piped to another shop,while the alkaline solution continued in the production process andwent to a 'steaming' (zhengfa) section, where the solution was evaporatedinto a thick liquid.This thick liquid was piped to a huge pot in thefinal section, where the heating process continued until the materialwas solid.The last section was the most dangerous and difficult.The liquid would boil up and splash very caustic material on people,and the air was was irritating.

Each of the four sections was in turn divided into three shifts.His shift had.only four people in it (this is the shift he worked infor the longest period of time, during the seven years there hewas transfered to all of the sections at some time).1He worked inthe zhengfa section.Workers could be transfered around 1ike thisbecause the skill level in the shop was low.The most common reasonfor a transfer was a conflict between people.Whenthesmallgroupsare so small, if two people don't get along it makes things difficult.

The head of each of these shifts was called the zuzhang. He hadthe power to assign work (at this point he brings up tthewidelydifferentstyles, and power exercised by different types of group leaders, we willreturn to this topic later.The group leaders were usually activists ofthe ordinary type.But in some cases,rarely,the section head wouldchoose a troublesome worker who refused to listen to orders to be groupleader.This was sometimedone totrytogivethe worker asenseofresponsibility.The section heads had the power to name the group leaders.The section heads, formally, are called gongduan zhang, or gongxu zhang.But usually they are called 'foreman' or 'bosses':gongtou.Sectionheads were activists, of course, but they were almost always veryexperienced workers, often with over 20 years of experience.

(1)

(2)

Generally speaking, the group leaders have no direct relationshipswith the 1eaders of the shop.  All dealings go through the section head,or foreman.The section leaders deal directly with the shop leadership.At the shop office,there was a director,one vice-director，a branchParty secretary, and four technicians who were responsible for repairsand such in the shop.There were also two or three very special activistswho didn't have any fixed office,but were often inthe shop office.7Theywere ordinary production workers, but had a very special status. Theyoftenwereexcusedfrom work togotomeetings.They were kind of likecadres without being cadres.((This leads to a question about whatthe difference is between a 'special' activist of this type and anordinary activist. There ensues a long aside on activists and activism).

ACTIVISTS:There are in general four ways that one can become anactivist, or four 'aspects' to activism.1) listening to orders; 2) ability;3)political thought (zhengzhi biaoxian) that is outstanding; 4) havinga personal relationship with leaders above--this is very important--alsocalled pai ma pi.

What distinguished an activist?IFor example, most workers used allkinds of excuses to get out of political study. We used to joke aboutpeople who had sick families: one week their father was ill, the nextweek their mother, and so forth.Everyone knew that this was just anexcuse.The practice was very common.When the average person wenttothe political study meetinggafterthe shift，hedidn'tparticipatevery actively or very seriously.1But activists always attended andparticipated.Most activists were shunned by ordinary workers, wedidn't want to run into them.'They were always reporting (huibao)on people for saying things,sleeping on the job(which was common onthe night shift), and so forth. Activists were hated by the others(yes, he uses the term hen) because they played up to the leaders andto the Party.

(He thinks it over further).FBut you can stress one of these aspectsof being an activist more than others, so there are different ·kinds ofactivists, and they have different relationships with average workers,Those who stress the fourth route, personal relationships, the most,are those who are hated the most.It is considered bu zhengpai,unethicalor lacking in integrity, to curry favor with leaders this way.'Theactivists who stress political thought are the ones who really believein Mao thought and do things according to their beliefs and principles.They don't necessarily use personal relationships with leaders.Theydothese things because they believe it is right.That is why they reporton others.They aren't really hated;but theyare isolated from therest of the workers.They are like heroes in the stories of old, theydon't care if they have friends or not,they distance themselves from

They have unique personalities.You can say they are too upright.others.

There are also activists who are not interested in politics, and whodon't rely on personal relations either.They don't report on others.They do great work, and listen to orders.They attend and 1isten atpolitical study, but don't speak up much.They can get some promotions,but they don't get promoted very far without outstanding political biaoxian.These people are well-liked, but after they get promoted they don'tget along well with their old friends.

The 'high-level' activists (referring back to the top of this page)are the most outstanding two or three activists in the entire shop.'Theyhave the best biaoxian, are very active in campaigns, and have specialopportunities to play special roles in campaigns and political activities.

(3)Afterworktheyoftengotothefactoryofficesfor meetingsinthepropaganda department.Ofcoursethey were members of the youthleague,and were on the verge of becoming Party members.Close relationswith the shop0director, and connections with leaders above as well.Of course they are still young people.TThey are almost equalin authorityand status to the shop director, even though they have no powers ofoffice.All factories have these kinds of activists.They are theones who are most likely to become officials later on.

They don'tbother to report people who sleep on the night shift, and so forth,jbecause its beneath them, too small a matter.‘These are 'plant-level'activists.lItismucheasierforthemtogetintotheParty.Theirtypical path of promotion is to get into the Party, do basic-level workin the shops for a while, then get promoted to the personnel departmentor other plant departments.The common (putong) activists rarely gotthis kindof promotionopportunity.‘Thereis asharpdistinctionbetween these two different kinds of 'activists'.(10/4/83， 2 hours)

The high-level activists have direct relationships with the admin-istration department, propaganda department, organization department,and personnel department. Most departments have cause for theirservices.They are all "red"; their political thought is most outstanding.They have forceful personalities,and can really communicate with peopleandpersuadethem.Theyreallyknowhowtogetthingsdone.This doesnot mean they necessarily use personnel connections to get things done;they might,they might not.It means that they can convince people todo things, can help out factory 1eaders through the force of theirpersonalities and energies. (Over a long period of time,they are chosenmodel workers, youth league members, and eventually Party members.

So to sum up:tthese people have "red" thought; they can reallyget things done and use their personalities and their relations withpeople to get things done.Afterthe person hasworkedclosely witha department for a couple of years or so they have close relationswith the department's personnel and the department leaders have a goodimpression of them. They are eventually promoted to become staffmembers of the department, but for a period of time they continue toworkoftenintheshopsatsomekindofleadershipwork.Fromthedepartment's point of view, they need activists of this kind in the shopswho aren't full time department personnel to help it organize its work.Like the propaganda department; it needs people to help it organizenational day celebrations, and this is all done in workers' spare time.After a period of helping like this they simply get promoted to becomea member of the department's staff,because the head of the departmentwill ask for them by name.

An1example:: A girl from my class in school was sent to the factorythe same time that I was,and she immediately began to establish her`activist character and became involved in movements with the propagandadepartment--al1 the campaigns of the 1970s.‘This was the preliminarystage.Sheaccumulatedmoreexperience andfamiliaritywiththemembersofthedepartment over time.They all knew her name and who she was.Eventually she was even sent to other shops to help run campaigns,writeposters in her spare time, and so forth.SShe helped arrange culturalperformances in the factory; meetings, posters. 9She did all the footworkand organizing. For example, on National Day she would organize a programwhere all the shops would give a performance of some kind..  Sometimes

(4)shewould helporganizeactualoperasororchestraperformancesbyarrangingg for troupes tocome to the plant.

The more political is the work of the department,the more ithas a need for these activists to help it in the shop.1But eachdepartment needs them and they allcultivate contacts informallyandinfact informally train them and develop people on the shop floor.For example, the personnel department was always interested in workers whocould write well, and they were always looking for people who coulddo this. 1It was a scarce skill.9Sometimes the head of a departmentwould call up the shopodirector to borrow the guy if work in the shopwas not busy but was in the department. Now this kind of activistof course is "red",that is how he is originally recommended to thedepartment.But his biaoxian is shown not so much through this but inthe willingness to sacrifice himself for the good of the factory bystaying after every day and helping. This is a form of zhengzhibiaoxian..  I was offered the opportunity to be an activist but I turnedit down because it is too much trouble and time.I preferred to gohome aftertheshift.'These people really are totally immersed (pao)in the factory's life.?They are totally tied in with the personalrelations and activities.

Activists for technical departments and production departmentshave to have realskills and training in addition to self sacrificeand political activism.Oftentheywereuniversitygraduatesandsometimes graduate students (remember this was the early 1970s, sonotunusual--Aw).SSothe requirementsare different for differentdepartments.For administrative and political departments skill require-mentswerenotsohigh.

Activists of this kind rarely have relationships with more than onedepartment.First of all,there are 1imits to the time that a personhas after the shift.Secondly, the work of different departments variesand requires different kinds of abilities.For example,the productiondepartment needed "eggheads", the propaganda department needed truebelievers and people who could talk, and who could pay lip service tothe Party, and the personnel department needed people who can writecharacterswell.SSothe personneldepartment has no need for talkersand eggheads, and such is the case for other departments.

These relationships arise naturally; departments don't set outpurposefully to select activists, nor do people consciously set outto be an activist for a particular department.It happens naturallyover a long period, and the relationships evolve and get stronger.

Leaders might have different criteria for calling someone anactivist.  Some prefer the kind that kiss ass, some prefer politicalthought,but the main criteria,it seems to me, is willingness to immerseyourself in factory life; and this includes everything about factorylife--personal relations, work, campaigns,aand so forth.

Now the word activist has bad connotations in China.Many peoplecall these higher activists 'activists', but some don't consider themreally to be activists at all; they consider them to be real people,and sometimes they really respect them.The average worker will becautious and uncomfortable around these plant-1evel activists,butthey won't hate them or feel threatened by them personally as is thecase with the small-time activists in the section and shop.

In the CR decade the most important criteria for an activist wasthestudyofMaothought.But this has changed since then,I could see

(5)it starting to change right before I left in 1978,although I wasin the research institute by then.  At that time the reputation and cred-ibility of political activists began to decrease drastically，Before1977 class background was very important in determining who could beanactivist. Worker and peasant backgrounds made it relativelyeasy;cadres children had it really easy.Almost all were young; itsIaughable for an old person to act like an activist.(Old workers wouldhelp out a 1ot, but weren't activists or backbones. They didn't dothis for any advantage.There is a rough dividingglineat aboutage40.After that the demands for activism drop off.

Activists are less important now because Deng stresses realability.Also there are basically no political movements, so how canyou show your political biaoxian?

Everyone can be good at politicsif they want, anyone can kiss ass and cultivate personal realtions (gaoguanxi）.But now that politicalenvironment has changed,talking andguanxi are less important and ability is more important.

Now less incentive exists for people to be activists, and manypeople now want to just go home after work.(Of course they still havemeetings and documents and small campaigns, but the scope for activistshas been restricted and the scope of real ability increased.AActivistsare on the decline now because their functions are fewer,as is thecase in the propaganda department.(Of course they will always beneeded, you can't do away with them entirely.

Peoplegenerallyacceptthepromotionof peoplewhosimplydogoodwork.But they still don'tlike the activist who is seen as trying to be an official. You cansee it when people 1eave the plant to go home.(Ordinaryworkerswalkin groups and talk amongthemselves.Activists walk all by themselves.At the bus stops,nobody talks to them.Of course activists aren't toowilling to talk and be friendly with ordinary people either, but thefeeling is mutual. But this is my personal opinion toward activists--others might say they are really OK.

Ordinary activists:the most important reward is promotion togroup leader or something else in the section or shop.But there are alsopsychological rewards that come from the status of being a leader and'gettingg intothe Youth League' and "getting intothe Party"".Thematerial things are not always foremost in the minds of the activist.There is glory in being an activist.Butofcoursetheactivistisalways the first one to0 get wage raises, and there are other rewards:for example, its easier to get a girlfried if you are an activistor leader, and the same goes for getting a wife.It's alsoeasierforthem to get housing (although this is less the case now).1Before1978 at 1east,it was unthinkable that ordinary people would be ableto out-compete an.lactivist for housing.Shop Floor Activists(10/11/83, 2 hrs.)

First of all,there's a difference between the activities ofactivists who are group leaders and shift leaders, and those whoare not. The heads of groups are always activists. TTherewerefourin my section.The main reward is that they eventually wii1 get promotedor get wage raises before everyone else,Buttherealincentiveisthat this is the first step on the road to becoming an official.If you aren't already a youth league member by this time,you join.After you're a group leader its easier to get into the Party.BEnteringthe Party and the youth league is itself a step towards becoming anofficial in many people's minds anyway, because it leads to later

(6)promotion.There are also some (but a minority) who simply arevery able and have a strong sense of responsibility, want to servethe people and are committed to the factory. They just do it out of asense of duty, naturally.lUsually all of these motives are mixed to-gether differently in an individual, you can't really say they onlydo it for the money.NMost important in my opinion is a combinationof wanting tojoin theParty and YouthLeague andtobecome anofficial later.

There is an almost automatic connection between being anactivist and entering the Party.Youhavetobeanactivisttoget in. In our section of 20 people, there were about 6 activists,about 6 youth league members (not the same people, though, becausesome who get into the youth league stop being activists).Itspossible to be in the youth league and stop being active, but that'snot the case with the Party.(Our section had no Party members atal1.( Only 6 or so in the entire shop, and that includes all thecadres.It was very rare, although it did occur, for an ordinaryworker to be a Party member.lAlmost always a person already hassome kind of office by that time.By the time you've entered theParty, you already have become some kind of leader in most cases.Below 7 percent Party membership in the factory as a whole, I guess.The percentage is much higher in the department offices.

Activists in the shops were active in political study and veryclosetotheshopandsectionleaders.They did 'reporting work!(huibao gongzuo).

They talked privately to leaders and that'swhy they were hated,1It was in private, but you knew it was happeningbecause when a meeting was called, the leaders often already knewwhat was going on.They are also involved in Party and youth leaguebranches in the shop.They are very active in organizing politicalstudy and distributing documents.When I was there we had l hourof study of politics after work every day.Thenthe youthleaguemembers would have another study meeting of politics for anotherhour.This was for all the activists in the shop who want to jointhe youth league.AAnother activity is the doing of good works (likeLei Feng); being selfless and so forth.lHelping other workers,making sure everyone was following the rules. So they pestered usabout sleeping and following the rules. These were real young guys,never married, so they had a lot of time to spend at meetings anddoingthings in the factory.They were activists in following thePartyline in the shop and bothered all the other workers.'This iswhat you have to do to get into the youth 1eague.lAfter they getinto the youth league, they usually stop being so active andtroublesome.  BBy the time one gets into the Party, they don't.botherwith little things like this anymore.TThe process of advancementworks like this:first you become an activist, then you join theyouth league, then you become a group leader for a while, and thena section or shop cadre.

The number of activists is always in flux in the shops, soit is misleading to talk about the number of activists in a section.Let's say you have l0 activists in the section.1Five get into theyouth league or get promotedto group) leader, but they're not so activeafterthat.They may start going home early after that, they mightbe satisfied with reaching their goal，So it is a process, and itis constantly changing.EBut after this, you might have anywhere from

(7)3 to 6 new activists rising up from among the young workers.

Yes, there are some activists who may give up after a whileif they are not successful; but generally speaking its impossibletogoback tobeing just a common worker and a member of themasses. You've already paid a high price, people's opinion ofyou change, and you will never be considered as one of the masses. Inmost cases people keep trying until at least they get into the youthleague, and most eventually do even if it takes a long time.

An example of the price you pay: in our factory we had peasantworkers, and they didn't put up with activists who reported onthem, not at all.They would just beat the guy up for reportingon them.There usually was no punishment for this--they'd just pullthe two apart and tell them to make up. The peasants don't carewhat the punishment is anyway.

They are wild and don't care.1Mostpeople, however, just avoid and ignore the activists. Nobody wantsto work alongside them, or sit with them at lunch or on the bus.They are isolated and this is one price you have to pay.

It was very common for workers to do little things to activists.We would make fun of them; fenci were very common. We would tellthe activist, "Hey! Lao San is sleeping, you better go tell thesection head!!!.Also some of the tougher guys would buliy them,slap them on the head and insult them.

Peasants did this to them all thetime.Activists aren't usually strong men, they're just scoundrels.Peasants often threw away their clothes, burn them up, trash theirlockers,hit them, and so forth.Peasants did this a lot, they'restraightforward and tough.  But the rest of us, while we didn'tdo these things, we still didn't mind it. But sometimes we feltbad for the activists.Its hard to tell who is right and who is wrongin any given situation.Most of the bullying goes a bit too far;burning their clothes is really bad because clothing is rationed andexnensive.And activists sometimes were after all doing only what

They weren't always being scoundrels.was right sometimes.

If someone hit an activist real good and bruised him, they mightcall a meeting and criticize the guy who did it.An all shop meeting.They would stop work and pipan.But this didnit always work so well,often the worst punishment was to write a long self-examination, andmost peasants can't write anyway so they got out of it.Andanywaythe peasant would secretly be considered a hero in the minds of workersif they called an all-shop meeting to criticize him. So bullyingcan't go too far, but there's no really serious punishment for it.

There are many paths to move up:activists at this level canbecome group leaders or section heads, or personnel in the shop office.They can also move up the the youth league organization by becoming ayouth league smalll group head(there is one in each section)，andget in close with the youth league branch secretary in the shop; whomight promote the guy towork higher up in the organization or toanother office as a cadre.

The shop office has its own youth league branch officers(tuan zhibuweiyuan).Its organization is staffed with people in charge of propaganda,organization, study, and so forth. But all of these people are not cadres,but do this entirely1 in their spare time.‘The only non-productive (tuochan)official is the league branch secretary himself. All the rest of thcactivity is done after hours.These activities,of course, are veryimportant for entering the Party,  Also its possible to be promoted tothe organization department or propaganda department of the factory, tobe a cadre.

(8)

So there are several paths to move up, though administrativeleadership positions, the youth league or the Party organization.The Party is much less active in the shop than the youth league.First of all, there are many fewer members.Second, most Partymembers held office and were always:too busy for after-hoursactivities.1 If there is a study campaign, they just give it tothe youth league to run.  To get into the Party takes a bit longer.Usually only one person a year for each shop was the quota forParty recruitment, although this varied.The requirements were verystrict. You can kid and bully an activist, but you don't dareto it to a Party member.GroupLeader Styles

Most group leaders couldn't act like officials, they didnithave that much power and really weren't that high in status.NMostof their responsibility was in organizing production and so forth.They solved problems and such. They are activists themselves, althoughthey have to know their work.TThey didn't have to solve technicalproblems because the section head or shop office would send someonedowntosolvethem.Their main responsibility was to keep up workdiscipline.sSo the technical requirements weren't all that high,but besides being activists they had to be able people with regardto leadership and organizing.  Each person had his own style in leading.A female group leader of our group, for example, just was interestedin business, never really paid any attention to entering the youthleague and Party.:Just likedtoget work done and that was that.(Otherswere different.

Group 1eaders were different according to their abilities.This was an individual thing.You canft really say there are two orthree itypes! of leaders.They do vary according to their strength,ability. As far as political biaoxian goes, it didn't really matter.Our section was a pretty technical one so that was the main criterionas far as I could see.

The power of the group leader really came from their ability toreport to the leaders above, "He's not a good worker"", or "He doesn'tlisten to orders."" That's where their power comes from--the upperlevels listen to him. They tell the upper levels what a person'sbiaoxian is.Most group leaders, however, just want to get the workdone and don't pay too much attention to politics.

Group0leaders rarely became real close with workers, because mostof them are activists, remember, but a small number were not reallyactivists and the people considered them one of them, and their relationsare better.

Group leaders often changed,It is not really a fixed, long-termpost.Group leaders have opportunities for promotion too, especiallyifthey are in the Youth League or Party.‘They can become officials inthe youth league branch, or a cadre in a section, or in the shop.Theydon't get promoted to be in departments like the 'all-plant activists',because they have no connections with them,  Their promotion possibilitiesare within the shop itself,

(10/18/83, 2 hrs.)More on Activists

When activists are teased and attacked, they don't retaliate.They expect this as part of the burden of being an activist. Beingan activist is tough. You always have to struggle and compete,

(9)especially with the other activists.Now I wasn't an activist so Ican't say for sure, but relations between activists seemed very com-

Things are tough for them; they have to play trickspetitive.and plot against one another to get ahead.The life is tough.7That'swhy many people drop out of the competition of being activists afterthey reach the goal of becoming a youth league member. You can'tdrop out after entering the Party, but you can if you are just aleague member.They way you can tell if someone is no longer anactivist is whether they join in with other workers when theystand around and curse the leaders among themselves.VWhen one isan activist, they don't ever enter in, they avoid it. But if someone'sno longer an activist, they enter in too. That's how you tell he'sone of the workers again.

The cursing of leaders was very common even during the CR, espe-cially from 1972 to 1977. These actually were the most lax periodsin the factory.Managers didn't dare grasp production or control(guan) workers, so workers knew they could get away with it anyway.They slept, left during work, did anything they wanted. The managersjust ignored it, and tried to be laohao ren, tried to get along witheverybody.sSometimes the cursing of leaders took place right to theirfaces.For example, if a section head told a worker to do somethingand he refused, and if the leader then threatened to punish him,the worker might say, "Fine! Hold a meeting--I wont show up!! Or"It won't matter to me,"!andthencursehim.sSometimes they'd evenhit the leader if the contradiction was great enough.Not group leaders,though.Group leaders rarely worried about this then because theyhad mostly withdrawn from active leadership during this period.Management was solaw and they didn't have much power.

During thattime punishments weren't backed up by any real actions like dockingof wages and so forth.SSomeworkersdidthis，but not all，Mostwould curse them behind their backs but not to their faces.Mostly,theworkersstillfearedtheleaders.Buttherealtroublemakerssometimes were made group leaders.If someone was really uncontrollablethey would give them positions of responsibility to make them actresponsible.  lI mentioned this a couple of weeks ago as an example.Group Leaders and their Groups

Groupsleadersoftenwouldhavesomesenseofagreementwithworkers in the group.1This usually happened only when1 the groupleader wasn't really an activist, or was an activist but had aweak personality and didn't enforce rules too tightly.Yougeta"gentlemen's agreement" (junzi xieding).‘These agreements areusually with regard to production and rules. For example, if a groupleader knew that a section head'ssassistant on the night shift wasgoing to come by to check on sleepers, he might warn the groupahead of time in return for their not sleeping.lHe would getin trouble himself with the section leader if workers slept. Thisalsooccursinthesettingofjobs--thegroupleadermighttellthegroup that he would try to get the quota reduced. Or sometimescriticism would be formalistic and everyone knew it was. This kindof leader was fairly common,

There was another kind of 1eader, more rare; the 'iron-facednon-compromiser"" (tiemian wusi).This is a guy who just said don'tdo it.Why not? Because the leadership says so.'They don't takethe time to explain to workers, just rely on orders."Orders are

(10)orders." These kinds of group leaders are activists, but not lax.They are "hard-liners"" (tiegar), that's what we called them. Groupleaders differed in the degree to which they were real activists,

In the bigger groups of up to l0 people, the group leaderhad a couple of activists in the group to helpohim lead.This wascalled "concentrated 1eadership".One of the methods of 1eadershipwas tanxin, or f'speak from the heart"', where the youth leaguersor activists reveal their thoughts, criticize themselves, talkabout their own biaoxian, doubts, wavering.TThis was always donein Party and League meetings when people want to become members. Thisis another form of leadership, along with the "gentlemen's agreement.!This atmostphere around this often seems false, often this is justa show.

Another methodof leadershipis togetingood withtheone ortwo big, strong tough guys in the group to help you out as groupleader.  Still another method is to be very hard.RReport peopleto the shop no matter what, affect their livelihood and do thingsto them that are troublesome.This workers are afraid to contra-dict this kind of leader,or be caught sleeping by them.

Often the size of the group had a lot to do with the types ofleadership methods used and whether it worked or not, whether theworkers accept it or not. One is the size of the group: 4 peopleor15-20?Another thing that affects it is what kind of workers arein the group. Hard, tough old workers sometimes will only listento you if you use the laohao ren method; they aren't afraid of you.So you have tolook at the size and composition of the group.Biaoxian

There are many kind of biaoxian; work, lifestyle. Each has adifferent meaning, and a different measure.Biaoxian means somethingthat shows a person's moral character (pinde).So a person hasa character to be assessed in all three areas. The group leaderalways has assessments of people in his head. And he is alwaysrelaying these assessments in reports to leaders, This is in factanother method of leadership,Ganqing and Guanxi

These are also means of leadership.1The first kind of leadershipmethod described earlier uses this method,  There is sometimes akind of gemen yiqi, or 'brotherhood loyalty! between a group leaderand some of the workers, and they become loyal to each other.‘Thisis a method they use to get along with workers; like not reportinga worker for breaking something, a tool, or wasting a piece of metalor a batch of products.This is part of the art of leading thegroup. If these relations between group leaders and workers aretoo close and the section head finds out, then he will transfer theleader out, tradee group leaders with another group.TThisiscalled'mixing sand". NNomatter what the method of leadership used bythe group leader, despite the fact that they are still calledworkers, workers always consider them cadres, leaders.(10/25/83, 1,5 hrs.)

Without gemen yiqi, its hard to get things done.1"Gemen' hasbad connotations, most people say just "yiqi", or personal loyalty.This is less general a term than ganqing, but its very important ingetting things done, especially in leadership and in relations with

(11)leaders.Yiqi is used more than ganqing. Ganqing is more general,yiqi is one piece of ganqing.(He says that yiqi may be used morecommonly in north China, because people in the north tend to bemore straightforward and open in their expression than Chineseelsewhere.He suggests that ganqing may be used more often insouthern China where people are more indirect--the implication isdevious).

There are many articles in the press now that attack yiqi, butit is very important in getting things done, and in fulfillingproduction targets in the factory.'The plant-level activists,of course, have yiqi with the heads of the propaganda department.That's whythese people are selected from among several other peoplewho maybe more qualified.?Theseactivistsareabletobecomeofficials not becausethey are more able,but because they haveyiqi with leaders,(Going through the back door and guanxi arealso certain manifestations of yiqi.

The yiqi method can lead to advantages for all the people whoare officials or all who are connected with them.The higher youare, the higher the advantages.1Not so much true for plain activistswho have not yet been promoted or entered the Party.But certainlyso for group leaders.An example: housing.'They have quotasforapartments that can be ggiven away in each shop, section, group.Each level decides how much each unit gets.Each level then distributesthem.:It is usually done equally, per head. So they will say theyhave two new apartments for a shop of 50 workers.SSame thing forthe movie tickets given away to workers as part of the union'sbenefits.They get down to the level of the section, and then itgoes to the group leaders or, if they have adequate housing, thenit is offered to the activists if they need it.(OftenthePartysecretary of the shop will make suggestions to the section head aboutwho should really get something. If the group leader gets offered it,but doesn't need it, then he will suggest someone with who he hasyiqi, usually his activists.

But thesedistributions are not alwaysdoneequallyaccordingto the population of each shop.SSome shops and sections havebetter guanxi with plant leaders, so they might get a few more apart-ments or tickets, regardless of the number of workers in the shop.

Housing distributions like this took place very infrequently.More common were distributions of bicycles, radios, sewing machines.Actually it is the coupons that are distributed. This is usuallydone once a year.(Guanxi works in getting some groups and sectionsmore coupons than others.Some groups might have twoand somenone at all.This is another example of yiqi.(Of course, those whoget more of these goods have to do something in return, like getthe group to work overtime for the leaders.

Other things that are distributed this way--there are somany I can't even begin to describe them.  Another example is workclothes.They will get a batch in once a year and distribute them

Another common example is lumber. Veryfree to selected people.valuable and hard to get.Needed to make furniture, which is very

Lumber isn't bought by the administrative department forexpensive.distributingg this way. It just happens sometimes that in the informaltrading that goes on between factories that they will get some lumber,andif they don't need it for thefactory they will sometimesdecide to distribute it to employees,Of course the leaders get most

(12)of it,the higher the office the more they get.But sometimes itgets down to the worker-activists.

The factory distributes many things.The 'eight big piecesof furniture' (ba da jia): nightstands, watches, radios, bicycles,sofas, wardrobes, sewing machines, and I forget the 8th.The factorydistributes all of them.

Why? They aren't available on the market,or at least they weren't back then.You neededcoupons forallofthese things, or at least for the better brands of bicycles likeFeige and Yongjiu.For all these things the commercial bureaudistributes the coupons to factories. The factories distribute themto shops, and so forth.

The factories don't actually get thesegoods，but thecoupons.EFactorydepartmentsget tickets from thecommercial bureau, sometimes through guanxi of their own.Theysupply the bureau with certain difficult to find chemicals,and thebureau gives them a few extra coupons for other goods.Then theydistribute them to shops, departments, sections, etc. Of coursethe demand is much higher than the supply, so often they have"distribution small1groups'setuptofindoutwhoneedsthesethings badly.They are supposed to determine who is neediestaccording to the number of people in the family, and so forth, butit doesn't necessarily work like this in reality.(Guanxi and yiqiareveryimportant in distributions.

There is one other way to get coupons for furniture. Whenyou get married they usedto give everyone whoapplied a couponfor a bed and wardrobe.1But onlyother wayafter thiswastogetit from the factory.Unions and Fringe Benfits(11/1/83, 1.5 hrs.)

Thethingsthatunions havetogiveoutarejustordinary.Thefactoryadministration itself is the sourcefor the reallybig things like sofas,and this is informally done.The unions'functions are very small, but it still has a role.FEveryoneauto-matically becomes a member of the union.1It has only a few cadreswho aren't also holding production jobs.

At the end of the year they give out jucan, coupons with whichworkers can get meat and other things at the plant canteen, likeon National Day.This comes out of the spare money from the dues.Themostimportant thingtheUniondoesisorganizeathleticteams:basketball and soccer especially.'The factory built itself abasketball court, but didn't have its own soccer field.

The .union also educates backward elements, people who chasegirls and so forth.They hold study groups for the backward elementsto get them to study Mao Thought.‘To apply for union benefits you goto the union head of the shop after the shift, and apply directlyto him.

For applications to visit family and so forth you apply firstto the section head, and he passes upthe request to the shop, andthe shop to the appropriate staff department for approval and tocheck it against regulations (the personnel department does this).Shop officials can't really put pressure on workers by refusingtheir applications for these things if the matter is specified in

But for all the decisionsnational regulations--like the tanqin jia.that are not specified in regulations, the leaders can deny thingsto people they don't like.Things can get arbitrary sometimes.Personal bias does work in this decisions, just as furniture isgiven out to the people the leadership really likes.

(13)WorkerResistance

Whether workers can resist orders from leaders depends on whotheyare.Its not hard to resist group leaders, because they mightbeafraidofyouifyou'retough.Thesectionheadislessafraid,andshopleadersare notatallafraid.

If the workers in a group get together and just don't listento the group leader, there's nothing he can do. In a section, themethod is passive resistance (xiaoji daigong).  You tell theleaders you are tired, and don't follow orders.This was very commonwhenIwasworking.But now that there are bonus incentives and punish-ments this kind of thing is harder to get away with.

Open resistance, a collective strike, is very rare.Thisisconsidered reactionary, and the bureau might investigate, and securitydepartment would get involved. But if only an individual does this,its not a big problem.:If you say "I'm tired," go home, its con-sidered a personal problem.Collective resistance is usually passive(xiaoji）.This gets the point across because it affects production.But if there is a strike the securitydepartmentgetsintotheactandtries to find out who the leaders are and punish them.Therearestrikes from time to time， but very few and they are short.Duringthe Gang of Four period they usually were connective with politics

Since then they are often connected(ie. the Tiananmen period).with benefits or pay issues--a couple of shops,ffor example,willwalk out over bonuses.But this simply isn't a problem, becausethey are so small.The main reason is that they always investigateright afterwards, find out who the leaders are, and arrest them.Investigation and Surveillance

This is very pervasive in China.Investigationsareverysevere (lihai).The security department is only a small part of it.They have so many people reporting to them, you can't be sure whois involved. And they use the practice "confess and we'll be lenient,deny it and we'll be severe."Thereareeyesandearsreportingallaround.An example:once I told a joke in the shop about a fair ladyin the forbidden city.Just joking around. The next day, there wasan announcement over the p.a. system. "wang xX, report to thesecurity department."They wanted to know why I told the joke, whatit meant, who told it to me.Back it those days， if you didn'tconfess, then the matter got worse.I said, "It was just a joke， Idon't remember where I heard it and I don't know what its meaningis."They looked doubtful, told me it was about Jiang Qing.Twodays later, I was again called to the security department office, andtwo guys from the Peking Municipal Public Security office came toquestion me; told me it was a counterrevolutionary rumore aimed atcomrade Jiang Qing.They gave me a serious questioning; they reallywanted to know who told the story to me.Rumors were very widespread

This is whyin that period, and they were trying to control them.activists are hated in China--because they are always making thesexiao huibao secretly to leaders and it often gets people in troublefor no reason.This kind of "white terror" has ended since theGang of Four fell. It was an abnormal period.

Therewereotherexamples.Onetimeaworkerdrewthewords"Knock down Mao!" on a poster, and there was a big investigation withamassmeetingaboutthat.Anothertimeaworkerscribbledabunch of characters on a piece of scrap paper, and some securitycadre made out the characters "Guo-min-dang"--so this was counter-revolutionary, and they launched another investigation.

(14)Dang'an

This is the most important thing about an individual. It iskept when they enter elementary school.1It is a highlyclassifieddocument.Everything about your background and biaoxian.This ispersonnel department's material. Only the head and vice-head ofthe personnel department can read them. Not the factory directoror the party secretary. Because they are so secret only the topranking personnel of the personnel department can see them; this isvery sensitive material. If you don't have a dang'an, then youaren't legal, you don't exist.

The problem is that if you make one mistake，it will alwaysfollow behind you--you can't enter the youth league, Party, getpromotions, even though you're an activist.  when it comes time toselect youth league and party members, these organs ask the personneldepartment head to submit a report on a person--they can't read thefiles, but the personnel department head reads them and submits areport about the person's fitness. There is no way to know whatis in your file.Factions and Groups among Workers (ll/l5/83, 1.5 hrs.)

They exist, but hard to put any particular ideology to them.Sections close together on the shop floor are where they form.The activists in the shop of course were one faction.There arealso always huaifenzi，inour shop they were the peasants(but notall peasants were badelements).(The peasants were permanentworkersfromthesuburbs.They were hired because all the youthweresentdownandthereforetherewasashortageofnewworkersinthe city).The biggest contradictions were between rural and urbanworkers. TThey looked down on each other.Often this broke out intoconflict--swearinggandsoforth.Conflictsoftenoccurredbetweentheactivists and especially the peasants just starting work in thefactory. Peasants often refused assignments and cursed the groupleader. You could see in some sections the peasants would talkonly to each other, and the urban residents with one another. You hadto pay attention to assignming work in groups only to peasants orworkers.

Another group were the huai fenzi, all were peasants. Theyplayed cards, messed with women, didn't listen to orders. Sometimesthey fought, argued, stole things. Too few intellectuals in ourfactory to form a faction.

There were small, personal cliques that usually were peoplethat lived in the same area and went out together to eat and to themovies, left together and arrived at work together.Thesereallyare called bang rather than pai. FPai has a political implication.You could say that there were pai among the factory leaders, oftenbased on political views.But all these other groups are reallycalled bang.Pai came into play when it was time to promote peopleto cadre positions. Bang usually have nothing to do with this.

Bang have use in the resistance of workers to orders of leaders.Bang can resist orders when they work together.Theyoftentrytodivide members up and assign them to different shops and groups.  Abang in a group opposed to the group leader can resist orderseasily. Bang are formed on all kinds of bases; commonly background,personality.

(15)Resistancebyworkerstoordersbyslowingdownandrefusingorderswasineffective.1But theycouldinfluence theshopdirector，de-pending on how reasonable they were, through their section heads.If the section heads were not ass-patters toward the shop head.Somesection leaders would talk to workers and find out their views; some-times they would push their views with the shop head. If enoughsection heads got together, they could influence the shop head.  Inthe factory they do have a kind of contituency politics.  The shopleader has to please the leaders below him somewhat to keep theirsupport and cooperation.iAnd they play some off against the otherand balance them.

If all the workers really hate a shop head and resist--as happened

in one shop where the work was dangerous and the shop headdidn't bother with safety--then they can influence the leaders totransfer him.This happened in my factory when several workersand section leaders wrote the factory leaders to express dissatis-faction with an incompetent and uncaring shop head.Labor Problems

The worst period was l976 around the time of the Tiananmenincident.EBy this time all the workers were sick of the CulturalRevolution--surveillance, political study, ass-patters rising up,people not daring to say what they wanted.Thisaccumulateddiss-atisfactionbrokeoutintheTiananmenincident.This had a verybig impact on workers; you could even say that the workers were thebasis of the movement that affected the whole country.It was likea spark hitting dry kindling and starting a fire.

Workers were very happy in 74-75 when Deng came back and Zhouwas rising in influence.You could see things relaxing a bit.Ofcourse, the wage question was a big source of dissatisfaction.During this period they discussed whether to raise wages, and theyhad discussions in small groups, and the opinions were passed uptotheCentralCommittee.The top leaders discussed it for a coupleof years and in the end didn't do anything.There were many workersupset about the treatment of Zhou's funeral, and many were involvedin the Tiananmen incident. Its not clear whether they really lovedZhou that much, but this was a way to protest the restoration ofthe old policies that it lookedlike was going tohappen.At theQingming festival that year all the workers made wreaths at work;at Beijing No.2 Steel Factory they madean iron wreath 20feet highand brought it to the square.The authorities thought somethingwas going to happen on Qingming, and they forbid workers to go,but that day all the factories were empty.?Theyarrestedalotofworkersandinterrogatedallthosewhowereabsentfromworkthatday about whether they were there, who they saw. A "white terror".Theinvestigationswentonforweeksafterwards.Nonactivists  (2/8/84, 2 hrs)

There are those in the factory who don't want to participatein politics. Being an activist you really pay a price.If youaren't interested in advancement either in material or spiritualsense, then you don't become active.:Its just not possible, though,to completely separate yourself from politics because you have toparticipate in meetings everyday. But it is possible not to listen,just put in the time. This way you can not really participate. But

(16)this depends on the period too. But even if you don't really care,all of these documents and editorials read in meetings have anunconscious effect on you.I have a friend who thought he didn'tlike politics and didn't believe any of it, but he came to the USto study political science and found that he really had absorbed alot and accepted a lot about the Chinese political system withoutbeing aware of it.Thewholeenvironmentaffectedhim.FEvenifyoudon't pay much attention theycover alot of material with you overthe years, and it has some effect.

But having said this, there are some people who are able tocompletely cut themselves off from politics. In the factory,especially the old workers from before liberation who still haveold ideas.They are respected as elders, so people don't botherthem too much for political study and reading documents. They can'tread much anyway.1But the pressures on the younger workers aregreater. But these old guyes, there's just not much you can do. Theyare basically exempt from politics.

Another group are people from the suburbs with low educationallevels. They just don't understand and they don't care.Theymightmouth the words but they don't understand their meaning.

Somemenhave not lived in the city for a long time. But this depends onyour factory. How big and advanced is it?  In a factory like mine,a small chemical plant in the suburbs， a lot of people got out ofpolitics. But its not possible in a large machinery plant or computerplant.

Everybody must participate in politics, but people understandit at different levels and participate at different levels. Itdepends on your intellectual level, among workers there are suchdifferences.And often political study is very superficial and formal-istic.But you can't be too lax because they might test you: "oK,you read Mao's works, what did he say in this essay, explain itto us." You do have to read the stuff, but its passive, not activeparticipation.Non-Activists and Distributions

Now its true that activists get first pick of material things,but often they can't bring themselves to accept them.They'resupposed to be selfless and serve the people.  So sometimes for moralreasons they refuse.Theymaytakeintoaccountthe needsofotherpeople in the group as well. The really valuable things, likehousing，willbedistributedtoworkshopcadresfirst，sometimesthe ordinary masses will be offered apartments too, the ones whoare not activists,  but who are just very good workers with cleanrecords. In fact you could say that this kind of worker gets thesethings even more than the activists, because the activists oftenrefused the privileges. The workers who get in trouble, however,whohaveabadworkattitude,nevergettheseopportunitiestogetthese things.This is for distributions inside the factory.

Activists， however, often get the raises before others, but itsnot the same for furniture, rations, housing, and so forth. Mostpeople in the factory are ordinary workers with decent records andno problems on their records.There is a minority of activists,a minority of ones who get in trouble or have had bad reports.So activists get a little less than the ordinary ones, while the bad

But in the future the activists are better offones get nothing.

They are the officials of the future. And in raisesthan anyone else.

(17)and promotions they are favored too over the long run. The long-runadvantage favors the activist.

How do ordinary workers get ration cards for watches, etc?The factory will get a certain amount of watch coupons, give twoor so to each shop, and tell them to distribute them ass they wish.Then they ask who wants them. of course everybody does. Sometimesthiscanleadtoconflict.Sometimes the group leader or sectionleader decides.They can also use arbitration, talking things over withtheoneswhodon'tgetitafterhe'sdecided.Sometimesindividualworkers will try to endear themselves to grou leaders and talk themintoit.Others will argue and give them a hard time until theygive in; fight for these things.FBut group leaders often have togo just on biaoxian, very important still.They sometimes use a rota-tin methodor take turns.There are individual cases as well.Inone case I remember they gave a worker on the morning shift whoalways came late the first choice on alarm clock ration coupons.For a real hot item like a bike, problems are more serious becauseeveryone needs this, if not for themself then for a relative.Eventhe activists who could have first choice often take themselves outof the running because they want tokeepa reputation as aselflessactivist. Personal relations with leaders,(guanxi, car also be used.This is very common; you can read about it all the time in the papers.

We've been talking

Guanxiisadifferentmatteraltogether.just about one side of it up to now.There is also bribery and theuseofpersonalrelationsaswell.Some people at all levelsmight accept a little case in return, like a group0leader or sectionchief.They can also use their ability to talk to people, be nice,obedient, and attentive to certain leaders to get special relationsandinfluence thedistributions.Bribery is the crudest form ofthis; simple personal relations is more subtle.This kind of briberytakes place at all levels.In the shops it might be a few cigarettes,whenthefactoryisdealingwithabureau，it mightbeacolor TV,or a dinner, dependent on what's needed, or money. A few cigarettesdon't solve problems at that level like they do on the shop floor.

An example from the shop.To get out of political study or ashop meeting, you need to get the permission of the group leader. Toget out of a shop meeting, you need the shop leader's permission.:Soyou might just give the group leader a couple of cigarettes and askfor the leave, and that might increase your chances.  At the shopor section level, cigarettes won't work.Then you "give a gift"（songli）：This is a deliberate thing.You have to make it seemnot to be a bribe.It is a very subtle art. You can say"Idon'tneed this anymore, just let me leave it in your office for awhile(like a TV or something)".The cadre will say， "well, OK"， likehets letting the guy just leave it in his office for awhile， butits really a gift.But on the surface it doesn't look like it. Its

This example is more likely toadelicateandcomplicatedthing.occur between a shop director and a factory director, and it is

This is like alikely to get a higher return like a promotion."token of appreciation", not a bribe.Its also a "down payment"thatobligatess the person to do you a favor later on, or be embarrassed.Its people who aren't reallyqualifiedfor promotions who have togivegifts.Chinese short stories now are full of these kinds of thingsthese days, also cross-talk. Of course many people think its wrong

(18)but it still goes on.This is more common in factories then inuniversitiesor researchinstitutes,where intellectualsthinkits undignified.

This has more of an effect when only one person makes the decision.But for raises and promotions a committee at upper levels may decideit. And if you've only got one person on your side it may not work.There are also honest people who refuse to be influenced. Butthis is never really a direct bribe; you cultivate a connection andit pays off later.

描述：

