id: 55088f0947
标题：Hong Kong Interviews: Informant No. 53
日期：1980-6-5,1980-6-7,1980-6-9
是否是时间段：false
作者：Andrew G. Walder
来源：
标签：文章
书籍：Hong Kong Interviews: Informant No. 53
书籍作者：Andrew G. Walder

正文：
INFORMANT NO. 53

PERSONALDATAAge:45

Sex:Male

Industrial college graduateEducation:Total Years Relevant Experience:23Last Year of Relevant Experience: 1980

Year Left China;  1980Initial Immigration Status: LegalNativePlace/OverseasConnections:Hong Kong native, returned 1953Class Background/Political Designation:

OS

OCCUPATIONALHISTORYSUMMARYPositions Held:  1) Technician, Geological Survey Team, Yunnan, 1958-62

2) Technician, Geological Survey Team, Guangxi, 1962-80Administrative Level of Work Unit/(No. of employees):

1) Geology Ministry

2) Geology Ministry until @l970, then ProvinceExperience in Full-time Manual Labor (for non-worker occupations):

none mentionedAPPOINTMENTS:3

TOTAL HOURS:

PAGES TEXT:6

5No.53Occupational History (6/5/80, 1.5 hrs.)

The informant was born and raised in Hong Kong, and graduated frommiddle school there in l953.He returned to China that year to help innational reconstruction. jHe was l8 at the time.All the youth in HongKong read the calls in Da Gong Bao and Wenhui Bao to return and help withnational reconstruction, to get a free universityY education, and that therewere lots of opportunities in China.  Also there were not many employment

Also the Chinese economy was doing well,opportunities in Hong Kong then.the economy had revived quickly, and they still had markets and no rationing.

There were student associations in Hong Kong which mobilized middleschool graduates to return to China.He didn't realize it at the time,but they were .underground Communist organizations.  When they went toCanton there was a reception center where they were met. For a couple ofdays they went to see exhibitions, lectures, and had one month of remedialeducation on China and its conditions. Then they took tests.If theydidn't pass the tests, they went to the Canton Overseas Chinese RemedialSchool.

In his first try, he passed the test and was assigned to the South-Central Mining College in Changsha.1Hestudiedtherefortheregularfive-year period. He studied Russian, and was a student in the Geology Department.They had other departments like Mining and Metallurgy.

In l958 he was assigned to a Geological Team in Yunnan Province. Theywere looking for iron ore.Their job was to assess the potential of oldand abandoned mines and to prospect for new mining sites.Theymadegeolo-gical maps, and determined the sizes of deposits.

Originally.thisgeologicalteamwasundertheSouthwestregionbureauof the Geology Ministry in Peking.Later, after the cultural revolution,these bureaux were put at the province level, each province having one.Each bureau was divided into teams (dui) specialized by types of ore theywere looking for.1Each team was divided into branch teams (fendui), and eachbranch team was divided into small groups.

In l962 he was transfered to a geology team in Guangxi province, andworked there until he came out to Hong Kong. legally, in February l980.1Hisjob was as a geological technician, and in l977 he was raised to be a geologicalengineer. From this time on he did management work in the offices of the team.He oversaw experiments, and the balance of mining operations.Wages

When he first graduated, he was a jianxi (trial) technician, and made about40+￥。FAfter one year he was made regular and was a grade l3 technician, 59¥.Right up until l98o he did not get a change in wages at all, even thoughthere was a readjustment in l977. He was passed over in 1977 because hispolitical thought was not considered good enough. He was changed to engineer,but this did not change his wage. He says they were interested in raisingthe lowest, and 59¥ was not considered low.Bonuses

They had no bonuses at all until they tried to institute them in l979,but theyhad lots of trouble.The bonuses were supposed to increase workeractivism but they had the opposite effect.Given the nature of their workit was very hard to set quotas to overfulfill for bonuses--how to comparethe jobs of geological prospecting and chemical analysis? So people feltthe targets were unfair, and argued a great deal about them.Therewerelots

-1-of problems.So it had the opposite effect.

They tried to divide workers into three groups based on assessments.Theyassessedeveryquarter.They looked at quota overfulfilment, qualityof work, and attendance.The bonuses were limited to no more than 5% ofwages.]For technicians, they were l2, 9, and 5.[Workersbonuseswerehigher.WageReadjustments

(6/7/80, 2.25 hrs.)

In 1963 or 1964 there was a readjustment.PHe doesn't remember muchabout it, how they arranged it for workers, but he remembers that theypromoted a raised certain activists, backbone technicians, and some werepromoted to engineer.!The main criteria, especially if one was also aparty member, was attitude toward Mao Thought.Whether or not you opposedthe line of the Great Leap Forward and the Three Red Flags, whether ornot you had been criticized as a rightist during the l959 anti-rightistcampaign following the Peng Dehuai affair, were also important criteria.If you had problems in any of the above areas, then there was no way to

You had to insist that there really was enough to eat fromget a raise.196l to l962, and not bring up the disasters caused by the Great LeapForward. In 1963, these were the issues bound up in whether or not youhad good political thought.

He remembers this because after the Great Leap he applied to go backto Hong Kong but they wouldn't let him, and asked him why he wanted toleave.He answered that it was because of the economic problems causerby the Great Leap Forward--he made a mistake in putting it this way.So he, unlike his schoolmates, was not raised then, because he had exhibiteddoubtsabout Mao's Great LeapForward.

They brought this up in l963 whenthey were assessing people for a raise.

The second criteria was how hard-working you were in carrying outthe leadership's orders, regardless of whether or not they were reasonableones, like the backyard steel furnaces.  SSo this also includes a politicalaspect.They did not have assessment meetings in l963.The party committeeselected nominees and posted their names or the wall, asked for opinions,but the masses did not nominate people themselves.After this 1964 read-justment, they began the Four Cleans, the Socialist Education Movement,and then theCultural Revolution and the Yida Sanfan Movement in quicksuccession, and there was no wage readjustment during these big campaigns.

In 1972 or 1973, they had the next readjustment.This was mainly forthose with low wages. A document specified. years of service and wage levels.People who made over 5oy were not eligible.Also,.only those people who hadbeen 'liberated' and had their cases cleared after cultural revolutionaccusationscouldberaised.Those whowere'left hanging'(guaqilai),could not be raised.Often factionalism crept into the decisions becausepolitical behavior was one of the criteria, and sometimes one faction wouldbe in power, so this affected judgments of political thought of formeropponents.But generally, factional influence was slight in l973 becausethe central regulations were so clear about years of service and pay level.

At the end of l977 they had another.

This one was fairly simple.

The conditions: l) political thought,After Deng came back to power.2) work contribution, 3) level of wages and length of service.Theydidn'tdistinguish between types of work, level of education.FFor example, if a workerstarted in l958 at l8¥, and now was a grade 3 worker making 50¥, he wouldbe raised beforea university graduate technician who startedat 59¥ andwho had not had a wage for two decades.(He is refering here to his owncase). So length of service was important, but they didn't distinguish

-2-between types of work and level of education.

When they said'good political thought'in l977 they meant somethingdifferent from before.They were rehabilitating a lot of people and weretrying to do away with the influence of the Gang of Four.:Sothemeasureofgood politics was attitude towards the new direction of modernization.But this was very complex, because they were callinggtheextremeleft'extreme right' in essence, and there was factionalism at the top andyou still had Wang Dongxing, Chen Xilian, and Wu De, and you still hadfactionalism at the bottom.

There were still a lot of intellectuals inunits who . had not yet been rehabilitated, and there were still a lot ofpeople whoformerlyI were extreme leftists, had beaten people, who stillhadn't been caught.

So politics were still in great disarray in Guangxi,and things were·confusing as far as 'good political thought' went.

This raise didn't really have any great effect because they ended uppromoting mostly people with long years of service and low wages, and itwas hard for those with good work( contributions to come through.At theendof 1979they began another wage readjustment whichhadn't beencompletedby the time he left in February l980.There was no political thoughtcondition this time.It was based solely on whether or not your workcontribution was great.Butthereareproblemsheretoo.Thedocumentsdid not specify what good work contributions were, and there was no setstandards.People did all different kinds of work.HHow could you compare

It takes a long time.

They had been discussing for two monthsthem?by the time he left and they still hadn't made any nominations.

This was thefirst time in history that they had wage readjustments entirely on the basisof work contribution.Discipline, Firings

There were no clear standards for bad work or bad behavior, so it isdifficult to talk about punishments as a system.People were punished inthe cultural revolution for their class backgrounds, and their thought ifthey were cadres.Also if you wiidly had sexual relations or stole things,these were the most important types of bad behavior for which punishmentswere given.But it'wasn't clear at any given time what would be consideredbad behavior, or what kinds of punishments, from criticism to expulsion,would be given.

During the cultural revolution it was no big.thing to be absent for 2 weeksin a row and not be punished at all, but at other times this was notpermitted.In.his geological team illicit sexual relations were fairlywidespread because they were isolated and spouses were not there.BButthiswasn't always punished.

Also，what would be.consideredcorruptionchanged.Administrators, technicians, and workers would be punished for differentkinds of things.

There were people who were expelled from his unit.Technicians wereexpelled during the CR for political mistakes and for having bad historicalbackgrounds.There were administrative cadres caught in corruption butthey were either criticized or given a warning. but not expelled. As faras workers go, he can only think of one or two who were ever expelled,and this was for stealing, fighting, illicit sex.One'sloverhadcommittedsuicide after the affair. ended. Technicians were expelled the most often,and for political reasons.In 2o years at most two or three workers wereexpelled.1Basically speaking, there is not any firings.If you come late,leave early, are absent without leave, you can't be expelled for this.The unitneeds permission from the higher levels, and you have to give reasons.

3-The Geological Team

(6/9/80, 2.25 hrs.)

Under the State Council is the Geological Ministry. Below the ministryare several bureau, six in all, and one for each of the big administrativeregions--south-central, north, northeast, east, southwest, northwest.Aftera while they changed to a bureau in each province.He forgets exactly whenthis change took place. Each Geology Bureau, located in a provincial capital,had a number of leading cadres, administrative offices and departments (chu).Finance, Coal, Materials, Logistics, and Geology.There was also a politicaldepartment.

There were about lo geological teams spread out throughout Guangxi.They are apportioned territorially in the province.They have theirown region for which they are responsible.PHis team was responsiblefor several counties around Guilin. They were the #l Geological Team.They did not cooperate with the county or city governments, they wereunder the bureau.

The work was difficult, they had to go around rough terrain by feot,often in small villages.The families lived far away. and this was hard.Most of the workers inn the team were young fellows, and they didn't allowyoung women to work in the team, because it would be very easy to havesexual relations. Also the work was too difficult for women.

There was an office in Guilin, aand about loooemployees in the team,

The team ran its own school, farms,which was divided into branch teams.

When workersand small factories.They had a base (jidi)in the city.married and got older, they were often transfered to the base so theycould be with their family more often.

The team had its own party committee, a teamn head, and vice team heads,

They also had a shop for repairing machines,andseveraldepartments(ke).and a chemical laboratory.This, in addition to the leadership of theschool and the farms, made up the team headquarters in Guilin.

The team had 5-lo branch teams (fendui) depending on the size of thearea and the amount of deposits in it.The size of the branch team couldbe thirty to a couple of hundred.They had a branch team head, a partybranch secretary, and also a vice branch team head.The branch team hasseveral administrative groups (zu) about 7-8.1A branch team would havevariouss kinds of equipment--large drills, etc.Thesizeofthebranchteamdepends on how many drills: the branch team had.The team was not specializedin looking for any special kind of minerals.They looked for anything--Nickel, Cadmium, Chromium, Iron, Tungsten, Tin, Zinc, Magnesium, and Platinum.But they were given specific types of mineralss to look for especially hard.Some they ignored.The bureau would give them specific minerals to stresswhich the country lacked, because China was trying to build itself up byits own resources.

Thedecisionwouldbebasedonwhatindustryinthelocal area needed, in order to reduce the stress on the'transport system.

Soif you were in an area where there were lots of phosphorous mines, for example,you would just ignore phosphorous.They also ignored gold, because itdidn't have that many industrial uses, was mostly ornamental.:Sotheystressed metals and minerals in a varied wayover periods depending onthe development of production and its needs.

The work process went like this.FFirst, they would have a generalsurvey, and would find traces of various minerals. TThen they would focuson particular areas where traces of wanted minerals were. After this moredetailed survey of these smaller areas,. if there looked like there was apossibility of a mine, they brought in the equipment and drills, and didan investigation to determine the size of a deposit, how widespread it was,its depth and estimated cost of recovery.

Then they would raise opinions to-4-the team headquarters, in their geological report.Theteamrelayeditto the province, bureau, and then the upper levels made the decision whetheror not to open up a mine, and if they decide to then they turn it over tothe metallurgy bureau for mining.The bureau makes the decision based onwhat their targets are for given minerals that year.

The informant's job was as a group leader of a general survey team,which is one of several groups (zu) which each branch team is dividedinto.Later he was transfered to a job as a technician in the technicalgroup of the branch team, and in his final. years there was a technician inthe geological department (ke) of the team headquarters in Guilin.  Inhis last job he was the head of a research group within the research officeof the department.So he worked at all three levels of the unit.Great Leap Forward

During that period they took steel as the key.SSotheylookedforironand ignored other minerals.5 They did not establish a small steel furnace intheir unit.Another effect was that there was a lot of pressure for moreiron, so they lowered the standards for percentage of iron in the rock beforeit would be considered ore. And they exaggerated in their reports of theamount of potential deposits which were recoverable.They exaggerated byseveral times.They ignored the normal scientific standards in coming todecisions and making their geological reportsThen this had an influencelater.

They would set upthebeginningssof mining operations at thesesites, and would later have. to close down (xiama), and disperse theminers because they weren't producing good ore, and it was too costly.They wasted a lot of money because of this "exaggeration wind", and becausetheyignored science. His own geological team in Yunnan was dispersed atthat time. First the Soviet experts left, and then theydidnothaveenoughfood to eat in that area of Yunnan near the Burmese border.The peasantshad tried to smelt iron, and had neglected crops, so for a couple of yearsthere was not enough food to go around.This was when he was transfered toGuangxi.Cultural Revolution

His team had two factions in it just like every other unit in China.But they did not participate in armed strugglee very much, although somepeople in his team had guns.Also during that period, the leaders wereafraid and basically ignored their management work.The geological teambasically stopped production for 2x years from 1966-68.Not until1969during the cleaning. of the class rankss campaign did the work began to berestored.  Some of the teams were effected seriously and basically stopped.

There wasHis own team continued to work, but it was fairly lax and lazy.also a situation of anarchism (wuzhengfu zhuyi).

If you wanted to cometo work， you came.If you wanted to do work, then you did.So his unitbasically stopped working during that time, but some of the prospectingteamscontinuedtodosomework.

Actuallyproductionwentupanddowm

Theseveral times during this period, it depended. on political conditions.effect of the CR on production teams was just as bad as during the GreatLeap.They destroyed things without building up new things in their place(po bu li).

-5-

描述：

