id: 6a32d75027
标题：Some Questions of Policy Viewpoints Related to Cases of So-Called “Adultery”
日期：1950-7-27
是否是时间段：false
作者：王明,陳紹禹
来源：广东省人民法院办公室编印, 司法工作手册第2版, 72-73
标签：王明,文章
书籍：Some Questions of Policy Viewpoints Related to Cases of So-Called “Adultery”
书籍作者：陳紹禹

正文：
# Some Questions of Policy Viewpoints Related to Cases of So-Called “Adultery”

(Excerpt from Chen Shaoyu’s[1] report on some current issues of judicial work at the First Judicial Conference on July 27, 1950)

At present, many local judicial organs have accepted a relatively high number of so-called adultery cases. In quite a few detention facilities there is a considerable number of so-called criminal adulterers—especially women—who have been arrested or locked up. It is said that there are also more than a few district and village cadres—especially officials in the militia, public security, and so on—who have been unusually zealous in so-called adultery catching, and who, once [the adulterers] have been caught, not only send them to be handled by the district or village government, not only send them to be handled by the people’s courts, but occasionally even tie up, beat up, and humiliate the men and women who they have caught. This issue has already become a social issue in some places, which must be properly understood and handled. At this point, there are three questions that must be raised for discussion: 1. What is an act of adultery? 2. What are the conditions under which the people’s judicial organs should accept so-called adultery cases? 3. What is the appropriate way to handle an adultery case?

Concerning the first question—what is an act of adultery?—there are some people with a very confused understanding. No matter if it concerns sexual relations between a man and a woman where both parties have spouses; or sexual relations between a man and a woman where one party has a spouse and the other party has no spouse; or a young man and a young woman who have sexual relations shortly before the proclamation that they are formally married; or ordinary sexual relations between a young man and a young woman; or a woman who, several years in the past, had sexual relations with a man other than her husband, [they] consider all these to be acts of adultery. [They] not only interfere with such acts, but even subject them to punishment. Except for sexual relations between a man and a woman where both parties have spouses and sexual relations between a man and a woman where one party has a spouse and the other party has no spouse, which can be counted as an act of adultery of both parties or one party, can the other sexual relations between men and women listed above be counted as acts of adultery? This is highly questionable indeed. Would it be appropriate to regard those involved as so-called adulterers? This is indeed something to discuss and decide upon.

Concerning the second question—what are the conditions under which the people’s judicial organs should accept so-called adultery cases?—the general rule has been that [cases] can be accepted once the spouse of one party personally reports the matter to the authorities. Should the people’s judicial organs take the same basic approach? I invite you all to take this into consideration and discuss.

Concerning the third question—what is the appropriate way to handle an adultery case?—the laws of the Guomindang’s reactionary government stipulated that it would be punished by up to one year in prison. At present, there are still a few local people’s judicial organs that take this approach and even some that apply even harsher punishment. Our comrades the Soviet legal advisors consider so-called unmarried sexual relations between a man and a woman, even if both have partners at the time, to be what in the Soviet Union is called an act of unfaithfulness between husband and wife, [and] to be only a moral issue and not a legal issue and for this reason does not require any criminal punishment whatsoever. As such, they are quite stunned to see that in many places there are so-called criminal adulterers locked up in prison!

In the course of the Commission of Law’s drafting of the provisional outline of the penal law, the drafting committee has repeatedly discussed this question and arrived at the following view: it seems that for a period of time it would not be acceptable, given the customs of China’s common people, if the people’s judicial organs were to completely disregard acts of adultery, but to punish adultery like the Guomindang penal code would be too severe, and indeed unreasonable as well. Therefore, one group advocates a compromise proposal according to which reports of adultery that are personally brought to the authorities [by a spouse] would be accepted. If an investigation showed that the accusations were true, a punishment of up to six months of reform through labor or criticism and education could be applied in accordance with the specific circumstances. Another group is of the view that so-called adultery cases should not be punished in any way, instead [the authorities] should explore appropriate ways to discipline such acts by means of sanctions on the level of public virtue and opinion. How should we resolve this matter in an appropriate manner? I invite you all to discuss.

Translated by Puck Engman

[1] Better known as Wang Ming (1904-1974).

描述：

