id: 4fc378eb9c
标题：Hong Kong Interviews: Informant No. 33
日期：1980-4-29
是否是时间段：false
作者：Andrew G. Walder
来源：
标签：文章
书籍：Hong Kong Interviews: Informant No. 33
书籍作者：Andrew G. Walder

正文：
INFORMANT NO. 33PERSONAL DATA

Sex:MaleAge:31Education:

upper middle school graduateTotal Years Relevant Experience:13Last Year of Relevant Experience: 1978

Year Left China:1978Initial Immigration Status: Legal

Shanghai native/Parents OS (Hong Kong)Native Place/Overseas Connections:Class Background/Political Designation:

unknown

OCCUPATIONAL HISTORY SUMMARYPositions Held: l) Temporary worker, Shanghai, 1966-72

2) Electrician, Shanghai Toy Factory, 1972-78Administrative Level of Work Unit/(No. of employees):

1) Municipal/(400-700, growth over years)APPOINTMENTS:1

TOTAL HOURS: 2.5

PAGES TEXT:

4No.33Occupational History (4/29/80, 2.5 hrs.)

The informant workedat the Shanghai Toy Factory from l972 tol978as an electrician.  For several years before that he had worked as atemporary worker.  He had graduated from higher middle school in Shanghaiin 1966. 1After graduation， he could not go to college, and didn't go tothe countryside, so he studied electronics at homefor a while, since healways had that inclination. He built hi-fi's from scratch, and studiedelectronics on his own. Finally, the Shanghai Gymnasium notified thedistrict production management committee (diqu shengchan guanli weiyuanhui)that they needed an electrician on a temporary basis, so he was assignedto the Gym, where he did work on lighting and on the electric scoreboard.

His parents were already in Hong Kong， and were giving him remittancesof money, but still it was not enough.So he wanted a better job, and theproduction management committee assigned him to the Toy Factory.  Duringhis period in the Gym, he was a temporary worker, paid by the day, and partof his wage went to the street labor committee, which made the introduction.So he became a formal worker at the Toy Factory.

The Toy factory was state-owned, had 3-400 employees when he startedand had growm to 7oo by l978.It was under the Handicraft Industry Bureauof the City of Shanghai， under which was a Toy Industrial Company.Hisfactory was one of several in the company. He was an electrician whenhe first started. He underwent a six-month trial period (shiyong qi),after which he was 'made regular' (zhuanzheng).TThis was not really a trialperiod, since almost all workers continued on--it just meant 6¥ less permonth of wages.

During the first year he did construction-related work in the under-construction extension to the factory building.Later he was shifted toelectronics work because they saw in his file that he had electrical

They transfered him to the'technicalgroup‘experienceintheGymnasium.where he was responsible for technical and equipment renovations andimprovements. For example, if a certain machine has a lot of industrialinjuries, he will come up with an alteration to make it safer.Wages

In his six-month trial period, his wages were 30.6¥, plus a 6￥supplement for everything.After becoming a regular worker he wenttogradel，36¥.There were no raises until he left. There were tworeadjustments during his experience. One was during l972, a small onebased on people with good political showing.  The l978 readjustment waslarge.]People with over six years of experience qualified.They startedthe beginning of l978, while he left in June.Bonuses

They hadthe supplementary wageof 6¥ per monthfor everyone.Ifyouwere absent and asked sick leave, you would be docked 2-3mao (20-30 cents)for each day missed, unless it was long term leave in which case you woulddock the entire supplement.TemporaryLabor

There were many temporary workers, especially when building the additionto the plant.They got from .7o to l.50¥ per day, depending on length ofexperience with the labor service station.in the streets.Theirtreatmentwas about the same as regular workers. They also got supplementary wages.There were about loo in the plant.They had them right up until he left

-1-in mid-l978.On the surface, they did the same work in the same units asregular workers, but in reality they did more heavy and bitter kinds oflabor.Discipline , Firings

Work beforethel978 readjustment was influenced bythe wagesituation.But how much is hard to say.Workers were all 'soft and lazy' (lan san).But after the readjustment, there was still no striking improvement. First,this readjustment was only related to years of service, and also the raises

andweree rather limited.So a number of people were still dissatisfied,felt that if something needed doing， tell the guy who got a raise to do it.Also, you have to remember that those who started after the CR got lowerwages.Grade l workers who started before the CR got 39¥, whereas thosewho started afterwards got 36. sSotherewerestilldissatisfactionsandproblems with worker activism.

Therewerenofirings unless you got into political trouble or intotrouble with public security.The samegoes for demotionsand wagereductions.There were none unless you committed a political mistake.In the plant during his six years, no one was removed for political mistakes.Toy Factory Leadership0and Administration

At the top, they had a revolutionary committee with a number of members,and four standing 1members who handled day today management.The headwas an old worker :from before liberation, also a party member.TThere wasnoparty committee in reality until about l974-75, and it was gradually

Therewerenorebuilt and this person becamee the party branch secretary.PLArepresentativess in the RC, but they did have them when he first came

Another standingcommitteein the company and also bureau headquarters.member was the former vice-director (the old plant director had earlierstood aside and was later transfered) of the plant.lHe handled administra-tive work. Another was a party member who was in charge of political propa-ganda.He was an old university graduate who had been in charge of the plantschool for night education for workers before the CR.1Now he handled cam-paigns and political study.TheotherCstandingmemberhandledorganizationalmatters, personnel. Before the CR she had been a cadre in the Party's

She had been a worker around the time of liberation,organization department.and later shifted into personnel work for the party.All of these peoplewere party members, and all were full-time, non-productive administrators.

The rest of therevolutionarycommittee members were notfull-time

The shop directors from each shop (four in all)non-production personnel.

Also there were about lo others, workers and technicians both,weremembers.elected right after the CR and changed thereafter only when necessary.This became'necessary'when they wanted to promotelcertain individuals.

The four standing members were appointed bythe company officials,andamongthese the head had been transfered from another plant rightafter the CR, where he had been struggled. sSo he attended a cadre studygroup(xuexi ban) within the company, and then later sent him to assumeoffice in the Plant.

The four shop directors were automatic members.The rest of the memberswere nominated by workers and staff, and were people with good political

They were elected once after the CR, had no fixed terms, and thereshowing.were onlyI occassional elections for one or two seats thereafter.

The .entire RC met regularly about once a week to discuss.plant affairs.But they had no fixed management responsibilities.For example, the RC memberthat worked in I's group had no real powers, he just relayed opinions and

-2-reports about basic-level conditions at the meetings.

Notalloftheregularmemberswerepartymembers.Amongthemwereactivists from the CR,'minor leaders' (xiao toutou).When he left inmic-l978, these people were still around. But he figures that by nowthese types have been cleared out (qing suan), because the old cadreshave come back in power.

Below the revolutionary committee, they had 3 offices for administrativepurposes, an organizational group (zuzhi zu), a political propaganda group(zhengxuan zu), and an administrative group (xingzheng zu). Also, afterthe party organization was restored, they had a party office with 3 peoplein it.Each of the 3 standing memebers of the RC headed one of thesegroups, while the head of the RC as a whole had his own office, the RCoffice, which was really the former plant director's office, combinedtogether with the party branch office.

They had four shops, each had a shop director,

Shop_leadership:an office, and individuals in charge of each of the 3 responsibilitiesthat corresponded to the 3 general administrative groups--organization,propaganda, administration.:Shop directors were appointed from above.The three office cadres were usually appointed, sometimes were elected fromnominees supplied by above leaders, using secret ballots and discussingthe candidates thoroughly in the groups, after which a general consensuswas formed.

Below the shops they had several production groups, each with theirown leaders and vice-leaders. They handled most of the management work.Sometimes workers would be appointed to be 'in charge' (ganshi) of helpingwith certain tasks, like making political posters.They also had someworkers in the small groups who had the title of safety inspector,health inspector, etc. But they had no real fixed tasks.TThesekindsof systems were handled better before the CR, when there was still aunion to support these activities and helptrainandorganizedtheseganshi. But afterwards the system was not handled well. They neverhad any '3-in-l' small groups to handle or study technical problems.

The group leaders were elected by workers in the group after discussion.Usually it was someone with long years of experience. In his group theyhad the same group leader for the whole six years.1He was a 'good old guy'(laohao ren), and got along well with everyone, had long experience.They discussed in the group, and the shop had to approve.Political Study

They studiedfor 30 minutes or so2 days a week right after the shift.It was formalistic, and there were rarelyI any concrete outcomes. Before theshift, they had pre-shift meetings in the group to arrange the day's work.These were also called 'pre-shift meetings' (banqian hui) and 'brief meetings'(pengtou hui).

They had night school study classes before the CR, but had not beenrun very well during 1972-78.There was not much technical or culturalstudy to sspeak of.AAlso, before the CR they had 'technical experienceexchange meetings'((jishu jiaoliu hui)， but not after the CR.They alsohad technical tests before the CR, he heard, but there were none whenhe was there.  He hears that recently they have been restored.Changesafter theGangof Four

The company sent down a work team early in l978, since the lingeringpoison of the Gang was still strong in his unit.  These were people who haddone violent things during the CR. So these people were removed from the RC.

-3-None of the standing members of the RC received this kind of treatment, butsome of the regular members did. The work team oversaw the RC's work, letit do day to day work, but decided on important political matters.

At the time he left, they were investigating the case of the RC headwho had been active in struggling people during the CR and who had connectionsof some kind with violent factions. But there was no outcome by the time heleft. So many of the leaders had at least some kind of connection in thiskind of activity in Shanghai, but it was rare that their errors would bejudged to be serious ones.The people (former activists） removed from therevolutionary committe for cultural revolution violence, and also othersin the plant, were criticized in mass meetings， after which they wentback to their pre-cultural revolution work posts.

They also had a lot of meetings to investigate the history of everyperson in the plant and find out who had beaten others, especially oldcadres. These were called 'ferreting out' meetings (qingcha hui).They tried to find out who had beaten whom, criticized them, and askedthem to explain their actions. There were quite a few of these kindsof people criticized--between l0 or 20 in his factory.Factionalism

They always had factionalism to some extent in the plant, among theleading group.  People in it were members of different faction during theCR.  This affected who would get good job assignments, promotions: and transfersup into the company.  Factionalism mainly found its expression in personnelmatters. Each faction in the leading group would 'pull up' (lalong) itsowmpeople.WorkersCongress,Union

They never had a workers congress meet during 1972-78. This is be-cause theydidn't start torevive the union in the plant until early l978.So there were no unions or workers' congresses until the year he left,and by June they hadonly finished preparatory work.

·4-

描述：

