id: d7b010aa49
标题：Hong Kong Interviews: Informant No. 142
日期：1990-6-24,1990-7-1,1990-7-15
是否是时间段：false
作者：Andrew G. Walder
来源：
标签：文章
书籍：Hong Kong Interviews: Informant No. 142
书籍作者：Andrew G. Walder

正文：
No.142

1No.142(Cambridge)Background（6/24/90)

Informant is male,39,came out December 1988,and worked in his unit until lateDecember.He worked for the transportation team of the Tianjin Grain Transport Co.I entered the dui as a mechanic right out of the army. About 6o% of our workers comefrom the army.In 1974,I was promoted to the administrative office of the dui. Didgeneral affairs. Did this until 1976, when he was sent to the loading dock section as avice ke head.In 1979 became the head of the ke.Thenwas transferred to a bigger kethe diaoyun (dispatching) section,as a fukezhang.Then in 1983 was promoted to beduizhang and did that until 1987.There were problems in the leadership of the unit,sothey sent down a group to investigate and they selected me to be the head.Then at thevery end of 1987 transferred to the company office,to the xingzheng ke as head,andwas responsible for housing, meal hall,other general affairs. He worked for the TianjinGrain Transport Co. Worked in the trucking section, and later worked in the companyoffice.He was the head of the trucking section.His section had 5oo plus people andover 150 trucks. Main task was to transport grain from storehouses to the mills, and

This was allgrainthatwasprocuredbythestatetobethen from mills to the stores.distributed within the state system.SSome grain imported from Australia,US,mostlyfrom Shandong,Hebei,Henan,Hubei.Sometimes drove long distance to these places.They have a very large storehouse in Dagang area where they collect it from variousplaces,send it for milling and then delivery,and then deliver processeddflour tounitsand sell the by products for feed.Main task is to protect grain supply in Tianjin city,todeliver flour to areas where supply is short.

He was the chief representative of the trucking section for the company.Therewere 12 enterprises in the company,his was one of them,but the other twelve were allstorehouse sections. Ours was the biggest company of this kind in Tianjin,there wereabout 6 in all.He was responsible for everything about the operation: productivity,workers’livelihood,safety,contacting other units.Even responsible for family problemslike marital discord, divorces. We had to handle everything; we are like the head of abig family.If the husband and wife work in different units,the leaders of units gettogether with them to talk. Usually if the problem was not great, someone in my officewould do it,but if it was a big problem,I would do it myself if the office people couldn'thandle it. We had 3 duizhang and one secretary. I was the zheng duizhang.Wages and Bonuses

Wage changes in 1980s. There were several readjustments in the mid to late1970s, people could get raised no more than one grade. In early 1980s and late 1970s,as the reformsbegan,there were readjustments for a portion of people.There was onebig nationwide readjustment for 40 percent in the early 1980s.I made 40.95 yuan in1973,no bonus. In 1977 or 78, was readjusted 56.60, still no bonuses.Around 1980,was readjusted again to 72 yuan. Again around 1984, after I was promoted to duizhangwas raised to 89.Later I was raised to 105 because this is what chuji ganbu weresupposed to get.Ordinary workers didn't get so many readjustments.There were only2 big readjustments where 40 percent got raises,and only one where 20 percent gotraises.

We began floating wages around 1985.The money comes from the bonus fundthis was decided by us. Depends on your level of work, decided by the heads of various

No.142

2departments.But generally if you didn't have a big problem,like being responsible for

IT wasabout 6-12yuan,an accident,or stealing from the company,you wouldIget it.depending upon your rank,with the higher jibie people getting more.

Lateronthefloating wage turned into part of the wages,because it was mainly handed out accordingto whether you came into work,unless there was a major problem.You couldn't havemore than 3 days of sick leave.And no more than1 day of personal leave(shijia).Can't leave early or come latemore than 2 times.

There were also bonuses.The amount of bonus was set at the average level ofend of 1979 average bonus of 5 yuan per person per month.By the time I left it wasabout 25 per month on average.The drivers bonuses were much higher than the cadres,was calculated according to the mileage formula explained above.When we first startedwe had to assess for bonuses every month and this always caused a lot of arguments andwasted a lot of time.For example,in our repair shop, we divided workers into fourgrades according to their performance,with a difference of 5 yuan per grade, range wasabout 35 yuan to 15.This was around 1983. Every time we assessed for bonuses therewas an uproar. Later,because of this monthly uproar,we established this system ofcalculating the bonus according to set criteria.These were hard,no soft standards,soyou couldn't argue. It became a hundred point system, points for attendance, finishingjobs,not arguing with cadres, no accidents. But the problem with this was that this wasstill daguofan.So the above levels began to control the average level of bonuses perworker per year. The limit was 25 yuan before I left.

They also had a year end bonus beginning around mid 1980s that was about 200

Again, only if you had a major problem like an accident or pooryuan per person.attendance,wouldd you be denied the bonus. We had standards for attendance, tardinessetc.The conflicts over the bonus assessments were basically resolved by shifting to hardcriteria and relatively equal distribution. The previous system allowed for leaders to givelarger bonuses to their favorite workers,the ones who obeyed them,and the workersdidn't like this.Even though cadres had the right to give points according to workaccomplishments of workers,they gave them out all equally because otherwise therewould be too much trouble.There wasyoung one worker who took a knife after abanzhang when he was give a low bonus for not working hard.He threatened him withthe knife and said he would stab him if he ever dared to give him the lowest bonusagain. Although this kind of event was rare, the contradiction is universal. We didn'thave the right to fire workers without permission from the upper levels.You could onlydo this according to regulations ifyou sabotageddproduction,slowed down,were absentoften,commonly behaved like a liumang,bad thought,illicit sexual relations.We did firesome people in our unit in the 1980s,some for causing major accidents. If you killedmore than 2 people and totaled your truck,they suspended you;liuchang chakan.Thiswas like probation:only got a living stipend and had to stay in firm for supervision for2 years.Then you could return to your former work. We did have one guy changedjobsbut would have been fired if he didn't have another unit to take him.He alwaysfought with people,slowed down,broke into lockers. The public security bureau hadarrested him a few times for fighting people outside the unit,injuring them.We hadpermission from the workers congress to fire him, he was transferred to his father's oldunit.Outside Jobs and Tips

Our living standards are a little higher than other workers. Drivers are

No. 142

3considered to be among the most skilled workers in China.This has long been the case,since the 1950s, but in the 1980s drivers have gotten even richer. We look for shippingjobs outside the system's responsibilities.And if drivers work on these jobs they getxinku fei, which is what the workers call it, but in reality its a xiaofei..The customersgive them the tip,its several times more than their wage.Eg. an older driver gets 120yuan tops a month, one around 40s gets around 80 yuan, and younger ones get 40. Youcan get a tip of about 20 yuan for a day's job. This kind of thing was very muchrestricted in the early 80s,late 70s.We still tell them you shouldn't do this, just likebefore, but they do it anyway now.Eg. a getihu that wants us to send fish down toShanghai would have to give the driver around 200-300 yuan for 5 days.The companygets 2.20 per ton-mile.Its the driver and customer usuallyyagreeonthetip informallyBut sometimes drivers are more direct and demand a large about before going off, andthe customer, wanting good service, will unwillingly pay. It was just become a verywidespread practice. Last couple of years it has really gotten out of hand. Its verycommon in the trucking business.We don't approve, and try to control it. E.g. if agetihu complains,we'll punish the guy for it.But basically if it's not excessive andthere's no complaint, we have no way of controlling it.

I estimate that at most our workers can get about 5o0 yuan over their salaryfrom this.At least 70-80 yuan per month..Their benefits are already good anyway.They get a supplement per km driven of 2 cents,in addition to bonus and salary.All ofour workers live in our housing,in the Hedong and Hebei districts.Our unit is a richone. From 1983 until 1987,under me we built 400 rooms of housing for the workers.The benefits have improved a lot in the 1980s.We didn't build any housing for ourworkers before the end of 1970s; we only gave out housing when units were madeavailable to us inn handfuls by the upper levels. So before 1980s we didn't build any onour own.The land can come from our own unit, if we get approval from planningbureaus to build it there.Or we can negotiate with another unit that has land;wecould,for example,give them 40 percent of the houses for their use.We usually use ourown land,however.Housing Provision and Distribution

We are considered to be among the best in the city in terms of housing.We havebasically solved our workers'housing problems. I had an apartment of 80 meters for 3people.The workers got about 50-60 meter apartments.The difference was not great.Our apartment was in the same building with workers. If my house was a lot bigger,they would know, and they would get angry. This is true for a lot of things; salary,bonus,housingIf you don't have the seniority,ability,work habits to deserve bettertreatment, they will get a bad opinion of you,and then they won't work hard,and yourunits won't do well.This is what Chinese work units are like;everybody knows howhard you work and how well you are making money and living.

Housing distribution.They have several methods.If we have a number ofapartments to give out,we organize a fenfang weiyuanhui;there are representatives fromworkers,cadres,leaders.This is the most normal way of doing it.There are threestages.They publicize a name list 3 times, and the 3rd time is the final list. There arediscussions for each draft.We take applications for everyone and go through them.They explain current housing needs,and members of the committee go to their homes toinvestigate.The standard is mainly what your current housing situation is.The firsttime we did this the standard was 3 meters per person, but the standard has been raised

No.142steadilyin the 1980s.We have organized 3 such committees in 1980s.The first timethe standards were 3 meters per person, 3 generations under one roof, children over age16, and children married but living with parents.The second time it was 6 meters andover 2 children (one child counted as 2), those waiting for housing to get married.

After the list is initially posted,people8get upset about those they think areundeserving, and the representatives, will bring1upand thenarevised listcomesoutYes,the cadre's relatives were on these lists,andpeopleraised their displeasure,but thiscommitteeisnotperfectandcadrescanstillI get their way in some respects.The cadreshave another method they use to.They hold back a few apartments to solve specialindividualcases".They will use these to solve special cases,also their own friends andfamily.Usually the corrupt cadres want to gotthrough the committee:if they can't,thenthey'll use their reserves. I was responsible for the first housing distribution.IIwasavice head of the dispatching department,was elected by the employees to be thechairman.I stated two demands the cadres:aa) cadres can't give me any requests forthemselvesor anyother persons;b)cadresabove me cannot talk to beprivatelyaboutanyyhousing matters (workers could).They gave me 50 apartments to distribute,andthis was the most successful distribution.ButIlaterfoundoutthatthecadreshadheldback 6 apartments for themselves.I found this out after I was promoted to be head ofthe dui. When I did it this way people thought it was reasonable and we didn't haveany really arguments.People were happy with this.I think the cadres knew when Iwas elected to be chairman that I would do it like this, so they planned ahead. The onlyargument was about 3 people at the end, no one could agree, workers representativesdisagreed, and finally I said we had to have a vote among the 9 members of thecommittee to decide.9 members of the committee were workers;one from each section,selected by discussion.Each small group nominated,then each section,then the duilevel. People eliminated by discussion at each level.A big section had 2 reps, small kehad 1.Among the 9 reps,we voted and I was elected head.At that time I really had aworker's status,and spoke for them.There was also a leading cadre who sat in on thediscussions, but didn't vote,and also a representative from the workers’ congress. Theycould give opinions but didn't have any power.

But this democratic method wasn't continued.By the time the 3rd one was heldin 1987, I was the duizhang but was about to be transferred out to the company. So thevice duizhang tookit over and made the decisions within the committee.They made thefinal decision in reality who would get apartment,even though on the surface we usedthe same method. They gave an apartment to the son of the company manager, the sonof a bureau chief. The representatives were not happy about this,sure they had anopinion,but they didn't dare speak up because they feared retaliation. When the driversheard about this,there were 3 or so days when no work was done at all,the dui wasthrown into confusion.Everybody did nothing but talk about the housing decisions, fromthe top tothebottom of thecompany.The two fuduizhanghad a lotofpeoplegototheir office to complain and yell, cry, reason with them. About 6 or 77gotreallyangryand yelled. These two cadres said it wasn't their decision,it was the committees, andthey couldn't interfere. No one listened to me during this process,and nobodycomplained, because they knew I was almost gone. After I left, for the first two yearsuntil I left that dui lost money,I think mainlybecause of this zuofeng problem and theworkers’anger about it.Also its related to business conditions, but the workers justdon't likethem so theywon'twork very hard for them.Butwe had profit before I left.This is also one big reason why all the workers try to get tips and get money all the

No. 142

5time for theiroutsidesystemworkWorkers'Dissatisfactions（7/1/90,3hrs.)

If workers don't have problems and you don't ask about them,the workers won'twork hard. Workers engage in xiaoji daigong.This became more and more seriousaround 85-86 on. This I think is because many cadres got great advantages from thereform and opening, all the things that the students were talking about. They got upsetabout these things.

For example, this was a problem of one of the older leaders of our unit. A lot ofworkers wrote letters to complain to the upper levels, but he never was punished. Hehad girlfriends on the outside,his wife and relatives got jobs in the unit, even several ofhis friends,he got better housing for all of them.The workers were upset becausenothing was done about it.Workers are just as upset about this as the students. Thisisa very serious problem and theyhavenotyet found a way to control it.The workerswrote letters under assumed names to the company manager anddparty secretary,or thediscipline inspection committee of the company, and warned them of this going on. Ifthey signed names, of course, they would certainly suffer revenge. He had goodconnections with the officials above, so the letters were suppressed. They had thisproblem before of course,but in the mid 1980s it went past the chihe feng and intothese abuses,and the workers began to slow down.

The reform policy is basically correct, but in implementing it at the grass roots ithas been distorted. In general, I think the reforms have succeeded. At least you can sayits far better than in the previously autarkic period. You can speak the truth more,raise opinions,use a wide variety of business methods.Much better than before,morelively and vital.But the 1980s have also brought a lot of shortcomings.Built a lot offancy hotels. But we still can't come close to Japan or America. What is democracy orfreedom? I don't know, but there are a lot of shortcomings in the way that the reformswere carried out. What the students and workers are saying is true. People's thinkingis much more open and liberated now.Attachment to the Work Unit

We did have too many people for the work to be done.But we never did releasepeople for being redundant; where would you send them. If there was a firm in troubleand they had to reduce the payroll and rectify the firm,they would lay off a number ofpeople and give them a living stipend. They called this caijian in Tianjin, didn't call ityouhua.They started to advocate this in our unit just before I left it.But the maincontent was to set up service companies under the dui; car repair, trucking, also cleaningand laundry. But most of the people there were children of employees. Those in thebrigade who had bad work attitude,poor health,low skills,were involuntarily transferredto the service group.They didn't get bonuses thatwere asin their normal job,at leastat first,and they kept their normal wage.Women who gave birth were required to take18 months of leave;normally they got 56 days according to state regulations;and youcould extend this by another 6 months. One reason we did this was because our nurserywas too full, and we wanted women to take care of their own children.They got 80percent of their salary,no bonus.This percentage was more than the state mandated 60

Some liked this policy,others didn't.If you insisted on coming back early wepercent.wouldn't give them good jobs to do. If you had bad health or family reasons, you couldtingxin liuzhi.You could also take long term sick leave at 7o% of wage, no bonus, if you

No.142

6didn't want to doyour job or ifyou didn't feel well.

It is very difficult for workers to begin a job transfer on their own.There aremany formalities to go through and they are very complex.Firstyou let everyone youwork with you want to leave, prepare public opinion. Then you go to talk to yoursupervisor.If yoursis a good unit,its no problem to let someone leave;but if its a badunit and a lot of people want to leave,its difficult to give in because then the othersmight be unhappy.Then you have togetpermission from the labor and wages

08getpermission from the labor and wagesdepartment. You also have to invite people to dinner, give gifts, etc. And this is only toget released from your unit. You also have to get someone else to hire you. You haveto know somebody who is a leader of the unit.Either a friend or someone you used towork with.Their leaders and the labor and wages department must agree.This is theprocedure for the average worker.It is easier for cadres to get transferred within thecompany system.They just raise the request and the leaders in the company or systemitself discuss it. It becomes complicated when you want to transfer to another system.

I know of people who quit their state jobs to become getihu..One person I know,he quit to become a taxi driver in Hainan.It is extremelyrarethought.Another personI know was a worker in a cotton mill, he quit and openedup a freightcompany,and wedealt with him.He had a tuoyun zhan.He rentedtruckssfrom us to do his business.He had three people under him, had a motorcycle and a sanlunche. He made a lot ofmoney. He had nothing at all when he began, but ended up a wanyuan hu, I suspect,thought we didn't ask him directly about his income. I also knew a getihu who raisedfish and used our trucks to ship them.They were also workers from a state factory whowere under tingxin liuzhi.

Before I came out, they discussed the issue of second jobs, but it was notpermitted. But a few workers had already begun to do it. In some periods,like themid-1980s,some were criticized it.There were a couple of workers and a group leaderwho made 1-200 apiece for a couple days work in their spare time fixing anotherdanwei's trucks.Someone in the other unit told us about it.And they were punished.I didn't want to punish them because I thought it was not big deal, but the companywanted me to deal with it severely. These were good workers though. In the end, Ifined them and gave them a formal warning. There was a cadre, and also a worker,whotook sick leave when they weren't sick and drive for someone else, made 20 yuan a day.I would estimate that only about 5-10% of the employees do this.

Some women in theunit who can sew will sew clothes to make money after the shift also.Some men wouldmake furniture,and so forth.Opportunities to do this are much greater than in the1970s.Living Standards in 1980s

Living standards have very clearly increased in the 1980s. For example,at theend of the CR the best things you could buy were watches and bicycles,clothing. Thefurniture in people's homes were very simple.But whatpeople demanded in the 1980swere much better things::TV's, tape players, nice furniture.But of course prices wentway up too. In the 1970s,one jin of eggs cost around .69 to .80 yuan. Right before Ileft,the price was 1.80 in the state stores, and more than 2.70 or so in the privatemarket. And the amount you could buy in the state stores was rationed so you had to

In Tianjin,you got a ration of 3 jin per hhrelysubstantiallyontheprivatemarkets.per month, basically enough to get by, but not if you wanted to eat well. In materialterms,the 1980s are much richer than the 1970s.In the past,things were cheap but

No.142there were many things than you often couldn't find,and you didn't get very much ofdifferent foods that were available.In the 1980s,its much more convenient,though theseason often determines what foods you can buy. But the price is much higher. Buteven though the prices are high we still buy. In the 1970s,a jin of crabs was about 1yuan,but recently the price has been 8-12 yuan per jin,and the supply was good.Saltwatercrabsswere.58yuan in 1974,but by 1987,the best quality saltwater crabswere about 10 yuan per jin. People still buy them,and still want them, even though theprice is high.

How can people afford this, since their wages didn't increase by this much? Oneway is to use your savings. Another way to get ends to meet is that the price rises forflour,cabbage and rice are lower,and the state give subsidies for them.Its the non-necessary items that have reallyy risen the most in price. You can do ok if you keep to aplain diet, eat mostly rice, flour, eggs within limit. People in China are used to this;they buy fewer clothes,eat more simply and eat less.My wife and I made about 250yuan a month and had a kid, and we could still save about 70-80 yuan per month. Ouraverage living expenses were about 180 a month.But my wife and I did well becauseshe had made he equivalent of 8o US dollars and had boughta lot ofnice consumeritems when she worked for 5 years on the Tanzam railway project as a teacher; fromabout 1983 to 1987. She is an English teacher in the railway system in Tianjin. I livedbetter'in China than anyone I knew;I didn't ever accept gifts from workers because Ididn't need them.So what I base my discussion of living standards on is the experienceof my brothers and sisters in the 1980s; because our situation was special.Relationships and Conflicts within the Work Unit (7/15/90 3 hrs.)

The party center always has advocated that leaders establish relations with themasses. But after many years, especially after the CR, and especiallly considering thequality of cadres and workers'mentalities these days.Can't saythe relationship is likefish and water. In our unit, I thought that my own relationsihp with the workers wasgood. I always felt that no matter what the problem was, they could tell me openly andI would handle the matter according to proper regulations. But I was very rare.

There are a lot of dissatisfactions in our unit toward the cadres.Its not likedurin gthe CR, when workers didn't dare say anything.Workerstodaydo dareto speakup; but they don't criticize their own unit's leaders. Tey criticize national leaders, cityleaders,other units leaders.But they don't dare criticize their own units leaders becausethey fear revenge,being made to wear small shoes.

For example,we had a kezhang who wasnt’ realistic, like to talk a lot ofnonsense,had a lot of influence among the leaders.Those who worked in his sectioncursed him behind his back, but never dared to say these things to his face.Thesewoererelationsamong the cadres.

Workers,situation is a litle different. They have formalistic meetings for workersto raise opinions,butt workers fundamentallly don't dare to speak up at these,otherwisethere would be very bad consequences for them later. So workers ge together amongthemselves and atalk about the leaders, who is good, who is no good.

We had a worker at that time, he told the truth to one of my vice dui heads. Hecomplained that his wife constantly used our team's cars for her personal use.He wasright in bringing this up.She also came to work late and left early. She was a workerthere too.Everybody was really upset about this.It was a women worker who broughtthis up.She also said that the vice head himself was impolite to th3e women in the

No.142

8team, sexually harrassing them by hugging and so forth. She also said that the vicedirector always came to the storeroom,where she worked,to get whatever he needed forhis home. She said this among a bunch of workers.

There was one person among those present who got along well with the vice-headreported to him about it.He immediatelytranferred her from her good job in thestorehouse to work in the repair shop..I was duizhang then and went to ask why.Hesaid her work and ability were no good,no sense of responsibility. But I kenw that herabilities were high.I told him not to tranfer heruntil Ihad investigated.Iwent to herand asked her if she knewwhy she was being transferred.She told me that she hadbrought these matters up among friends,and told me that they were true and that theywould hold up under investigation.I than went back and told him that he couldn'ttrnafer her because I knew why and don't ask any more about it,because it would harmcadre worker relations.

This kind of thing was common.There was a worker who cleaned up around thedui offices.An old worker,he brought something up about leaders in a meeting. Hesaid certain leaders,especially XX and XX, we unfair to workers and didn't act like trueleaders, gave some workers more bonus and others less for no good reason..Whenassigning children of workers to jobs in our unit (which was common),the cadres gavehis child the worst job,moving team. He told me about it and I transferred his son tobetterjob.

This shows that workers are unable to bring up direct criticisms to leaders,can'tbring up things to their faces without fear of retaliation.These are things that thecadres should know,they would be able to improve the unit if they could hear thesethings, and correct their behavior. But revenge is so common in these cases workersdon't dare. Cadres have power and can do this,workers have no choice but to work andmad their living.

Cadres also have their favorites, and try their hardest to give them wageincreases, apartments,bonuses. But they are in a minority. These workers are anadvantage for the cadre.They help him paint his house,move furniture,buy presentsand send to him, run errands for him like going to the market to buy food. Theworkers who do this aren't necessarily activists, theere may be a couple who have goodbiaoxian, but in generally these are workers who are pretty hua. Theuy are just tryingto gao hao guanxi, live better.

Ways workers have to express their dissatisfaction.Workers can go talk to thecadre directly, or bring it up in a meeting..But this is very rare, you can only do this isa good cadre is involved.If its a bad cadre, a worker can go up to the cadre and yell andscream at him.This is more common. The cadres can yell back in this situation. Butwhen you yell at a cadre, you bring up your own problem, not their problem.This isabout your own problems--why didn't I get a bigger bonus, why didn't I get anapartment? If they don't attack the cadre himself, the cadre won't take revenage. Inthese situations, yelling is often effective, especially if you keep at it over several daysand if your demand is reasonable.Often a cadre will back down.

Another way is that a worker who is dissatisfied will get extremely drunk andthen go see the fu duizhang to yell and scream,grab by the shirt,push. If he's soberwhen he does this kind of thing,he would certainly be arrested for this,or would receivemuch more severe punishment.But if he's drunk its considered less serious.This iswhen the cadre has already done something like take revenage on somebody.This wasusually only the ytoung an relatively ignorant guys who would do this.

No.142

9

Another way is to go to your apartment in the evening and knock on the door,ifhe answers talk and talk and complain and do this until midnight, and do it night afternight.Often a cadre will see who is there and not open the door; then the worker willjust pound the door for a long time and then leave.I wasn't afraid to answer my doorbecause workers often cae to talkabout something for a shortwhile and thenleave.

Another way is to break tools, break glass on the trucks.Slowdowns also, butoften slowdowns arenot for any specificcpurpose; this has become such a common socialcondition that it is not always a resopnse to specific dissatisfactions.

On the surface, things haven't changed since the 1970s,but in workers’minds,things are much different. In people's minds, the relations have gotten much worse inthe 1980s.Workers all have the attitude that cadres lie and are trying to cheat you.They say something and they don't listen, don't believe it. Wasn't this bad in the 1970s,and the corruption wasn't so bad during the Cultural Revo9lution among cadres either.Cadres behavior was better back then; their treatment was not much better back then;wages, apartments. They didn't live much differently from workers back then. Therewsan't so much distrust and suspicion among workers back then.There is more of asense now that workers and cadres are two different strata (jieceng).

There are a lot ofreasons for this.Workers own thinking has been opened up.There are more things that they want now, but they can only get a few of them. Alsothe inflation is a serious problem for workers.But cadres can use their opower andtheir networkof conections to get all kinds of things thatworkers can't get.Theproblems that workershave areverydifferent from those ofcadres.Cadresdon'tworryabout the factory's well being, or the well being of the family of the workunit. Theythink ofwayss to use the unit and their connections to solve their owwn problems.Workers think they should use their connections to helpo everyone in the unit

The units basically ignore the upper levels speeches and directives. They don'tobey Deng's speeches and the documents.Before 1980 we had 3 days of political studyfor 1 1/2 hours in the evening. We don't basically have it anymore.Its a waste of timeand if we had it workers wouldn't come.Its better in American;here if you stay afterwork they pay you. If they paid you to come to these meetings, sure workers would goin China.

Sometimes workers also would agree among themselves to work slowly.I ran intothis twice when I was duizhang. The workers in the moving team,over 60 men, wereupset about how jobs were assigned. They refuesed to work. Didn't call it a strike, justsaid they wouldn't do the jobs aassigned. All the men refused to work in one team,because they felt the leaders were giving better work to another team.This went on for2-3 days until the leaders came down and talked over their demands,and eventuallyagreed that they would give out assignments more equally..This demand was easy tomeet.Other than a cadre coming down to criticize them for using the wrong methodsthere was no specific punishments, but of course they didn't get bonuses for those daysbecause they didn't come to work.

Another instance was in the repair shop.The problem was that the leader of oneof the ban in the shop,28 workers in all,had treated one worker badly.One worker inthe team had criticized the shop leader for a good reason--the team was getting difficultjobs to make high bonuses on--but they didn't listen and transferred him out aspunishment.The entire ban refused to work because of this,said they wanted theproblem remedied and wanted the worker transferred back.This was after all a bonusproblem for the whole ban. After I went donw to investigate, I found that the shop10

No.142director had had a serious leaderhsip style problem.He was very dogmatic,had poorrelations with the workers.I criticized the shop head for handling this poorly,and fortaking revenge on a worker for raising a criticism. I seriously thought about replacingthis old guy. He was over 50 years old. He didn't want to listen to me because I wasso much younger than him,he thought he knew better than me, I was so young didn'tunderstand things. I went and settled the problem myself, but it took 4 or 5 days.Iheld a meeting with all the workers and with several other cadres; told them to bringuop their problem;I was there to resolve the issue and not to fear any retaliation.Theyraised a lot of complaints;some I resolved,others I said weren't reasonable.But itfinally worked. You can't just take revenge on people who complain.

Workershave a lotofways to struggleagainst cadres.Open and hidden,in frontand behind, by sticking one's neck out and by not sticking one's neck out.

Cadres'attitude towards workers. At the top level, we had to think about gettingthem to complete the work we wanted them to do. We sought to improve their livingstandards,solve their problems,if not for all at elast for a certain number of them.Butcadres at the lower levels often got into conflicts with individual workers who wouldn'tlisten or who would criticize them.

There are some cadres who are afraid of workers. I wasn't myself, because Ihandled things properly. But the cadres who were taking advantage of their positions tobenefit their friends and familes often feared the workers."BEause they knew workershad opinions toward them,would often come and yell at them.So they didn't trust theworkers,and even feared them.

Cadres often complain that today the workers don't listen to them.Before theCR, workers would listen to them, take orders. Today, the workers won't listen, won'ttake orders and don't respect the leaders.

But there are some advantages today:workers don't suffer from the same kind ofpolitical pressures as before the reforms.And they don't interfere in the relationsbetween the sexes in the way they did before the reform and opening. Before thereform,a boy and girl couldn't even be seen together with a lot of things being saidaned peoplee bothering them.And workunits don't care anymore if people from differentclass backgrounds in the same unit want to get married. They don't interfere anymore.

I would say that the biggest change in leader worker relations from the 70sthrough today is the loss of mutual trust. In fact,this has also happened betweendifferentlevels of cadres.Cadres in the unit didn't trust cadres above either,includingthose at the center.This has happened even though workers situation is better thanbefore. I think this is because there is still a big gap between want workers are thinkingof,what they want, and what theyyhavegotten.Workersnow knowwhat life is likeoverseas and they have bigger demands,higher standards.Also workers don't believe inany socialism, party's line and policies, Mao's thought,Marxism-Leninism.Nobody hasany trust or respect for these things anymore. Now the newspapers in China reportthings about our own country,the dark side of China’s society,the living standardsabroad. You couldn't even imagine these things before the reforms. This has had a bigimpact on mak\ing people more realistic and practical. The more open people's thinkingbecomes, the more China opens up,the higher the demands of the people for their lives.This is actually a big problem--people want so much in China but they aren't willing towork really hard to get it.

Relations between workers are also very complicated. Workers don't all get alongwith one another very well. There are no really big conflicts, no conflicts of interest

No.142

11between groups of workers. It is an individual thing; one guy gets an apartment,another doesn't; one worker gets promoted to be group leader,another doesn't. Theremight be a group of 5 or 6 who are really close to one another, while the others aren't.Workers'thinking is not all the same either,there are a lot of individual differences.Workers also argue with one another, fight, curse.

Changes in the party. At beginning of the 1980s, the party's organization wasstill strong and had a big role. By the mid-1980s, from the party central right down tothe basic units,they carried out the separation of partyyand administration.The partywasonlyy suposed to handle their internal matters. This was very hard to carry out;people found it hard to accept.People's were used to going to the party secretary tohandle everything.The political cadres in the unit couldn't accept this.But their powerdropped a lot; by the time I left the party secretary was just one of the fu duizhang.The party's just didn't have much power when I left.But I suspect from reading thepapers since June 4 that the role of the party has risen again. But the status of theparty still is low throughout China, especially in the workunits.

In the past workers were educated that only socialism could protect their rightsgive them enough to wear and eat.But now workes think that the capitalist countrieshave all progressed much faster than the socialist ones.Whole world,even the smallcountries of southeast Asia have done better.A lotof them think that socialism ismeaningless, can't compare to capitalism.Taiwan is richer than China, what use issocialism?

Cadres thinking is even more complicated. They have more information, canthink things over more.They almost all realize that if we continue to do things in theways we do now,we'll never get anywhere.Everyone has their own point of view,butthere's a gerneral feeling that the current setup just won't work.Has to change.Butnobody talks about it in meetings, this is just a common feeling. When they get togetherto talk,theyoften talk about their worries about China,the problem of corruption,thefear of a political campaign from above. But when they get into a meeting, they don'tdare bring thiese things up.Deng said that they wouldn't have anymore politicalcampaigns,but in reality in the 1980s they've had quite a few. So many people don'tbelieve in teh party, or any party, anymore.The party can't handle the problems Chinafaces, but I don't know whether any party can.Look at the fact that so many of thechildren of the high level cadres are in America.What are the people back in Chinasupposed to think about this? Bo Yibo, Jiang Zemin, Han Xu, Deng Xiaoping (in past),and many many others are here and in France, Japan, other places.Whatare thepeople supposed to think about this? With one side ofyour moouth you talk aboutMarxism Leninistm and socialism,yet your children are all abroad!This kind of thingmakes people hate the leaders of the party.Every country has its problems, but China,unless they changeethings,the country will get nowhere.I get letters from workers inmy unit these days saying that nobody is really doing any work there now. They drinkteam read papers,and if there's some work,they'll do some.

描述：

