id: 040df0c42f
标题：Hong Kong Interviews: Informant No. 50
日期：1980-5-29,1980-6-3
是否是时间段：false
作者：Andrew G. Walder
来源：
标签：文章
书籍：Hong Kong Interviews: Informant No. 50
书籍作者：Andrew G. Walder

正文：
INFORMANT NO.50PERSONALDATA

Sex:MaleAge:25Education:Middle school graduate, some college (english)Total Years Relevant Experience:7

Year Left China:  1979Last Year of Relevant Experience: l978Initial Immigration Status:Legal

China native/Parents 0S Thailand (pre'49)NativePlace/overseasConnections:Class Background/Political Designation:OS/professional (zhiyuan)

OCCUPATIONAL HISTORY SUMMARYPositions Held:  l) Balance repairman, Nanning Measurements Management

Institute, 1972-78Administrative Level of Work Unit/(No. of employees):

1) Municipal/(50)

TOTAL HOURS: 3.5APPOINTMENTS:2

PAGES TEXT:

5No.50Occupational History

(5/29/80, 2 hrs.)

Theinformant graduatedinl972fromseniormiddleschoolinNanning.He is currently 25 years old.1After graduation he was assigned to aMeasurementsManagement Institute(jiliangguanbi.suo），under theScientific and Technical Bureau of Nanning City.

The general job of theoffice was to inspect and repair, and adjust all measuringg instruments,electricityI and machine meters.The employees went around to all unitsand factories to make sure all temperature gauges, measuring tools,etc. are up to state-set standards for these instruments.

Theycheckandadjust these instruments to make sure that state products are all.upto

When he first left school, he was an apprentice worker for 3 years,standard.where he received on the job training.AAfter this he became a "balancerepairman" (tianping xiuli gong).At the end of l975, he was made a grade1 worker.In l976, at the end of his first year as a grade l worker, hewas raised to grade 2.  In l978 he stopped working, sat for the universityexam, and tested into Nanning Normal University, where he studied in theEnglish Department for one year.He had earlier studied English for oneyear at home before the CR with his parents, both of whoma are universityenglish teachers.  SSo his english presently is very good.

Both his parents had been struggled against during the CR--repeatedlyfor about one year.

His father was beaten badly on one occasion withrifle butts, by students at a struggle session.Both his parents were keptin a cell for one year, during which they could only visit their on-campus

The informant was l2 at the time, and his younger sisteronly7occasionally.10.They had to take care of themselves, and stay at home.They saw littleof their parents during that year.The students in the primary school alsobeat the informant up repeatedly, called him a "son of a dog", which hadpolitical connotations--it meant that your parents were bad, so you were

This went on for 2bad.They would beat him up whenever they saw him.years.They did this because they all followed their parents, who weremembers of factions.:So factionalism reached down into the primary schools.The primary school was not attached to the university but to the city.

His father was originally from Taishan County, Guangdong, born inBurma, came back to China in the 1940s, got his degree in l952 from QinghuaUniversity Foreign Languages Institute in English.

The informant says that he was discriminatedI against in other ways.There were 3 backward elements in his school class that year, and he wasone of them.

They were not allowed to join the Red Guards.  He remembersthatanotheroftheboy'sfatherswasaccusedofbeingasecretagent,

Also, when it came time for job assignmentsandwaskilledduringtheCR.he was sent to be an apprentice worker because of his family background.

He hated his upperHe claimed bad health to avoidlgoingtothecountryside.middle school teacher who usedd to tell: him that he had better prepare to goto the countryside after graduation because of his family background.Hehated him, because he felt this man's opinion would send him to the countryside.The year l972 was a good year for job assignments--it was the biggest yearof labor recruitment in the early 1970s, better than either 197l or l973.So only a small percentage went to the countryside--those with bad familybackgrounds.That is why..he feels this was discrimination.lEveryone wassurprised when he got his urban job assignment and it turned out to be a goodone. He figures they thought a weights and measurements office would beheavy manual labor--lifting heavy weights, but it wasn't.

TheChinesegovernmentgavehisfamilypermissiontoleavefor

-1-Australia in June, l979, and the entire family came to Hong Kong then.Wages

As a first-year apprentice, he made l9¥, plus a 2.5¥ grain subsidy.The second year he made 2l¥, and the third, 23¥.After the third year， theyall wrote summaries about their work experience over the past 3 years--in both politics and work skills.1Did you work hard? Were you activein politics? what did you learn? what was your opinion toward your masters.did you respect them? TThe only apprentices who didn't get promoted hadpolitical problems. After being made a regular worker (zhuanzheng), hewas grade 1 and got 32. After one year, he was promoted to grade 2, 37¥.The only people not raised automatically after one year were those withpolitical problems. They got a 2.5¥ grain supplement. The cool drinksupplement during the summer (June-Sept) was l.5¥ per month. while an.apprentice, they got 2o per year for clothing allowance. while a regularworker， they got new work clothes once every 3 years.He didn't get anymore raises after that, but his friends have since written to tell him thatthey have gotten raises since the end of l979.

When he left in l978 to go to the university, he still drew his paybecause there was a regulation thenn saying that if you had worked in aunit for 5 years you would get fullL pay if you attended a university.

There was a wage readjustment: in early 1978 for people who had wcrkedfor a long time, since l97l, and whose wages still were low. All thesepeople got raises at once. They did not assess people's work contribution."Contribution" is too abstract--it is hard to calculate.1He and his friendsdidn't concern themselves with this, since they didn't expect a raise.Bonuses

There were no bonuses at any time, because they were a management unitand not a production unit.There was no output, no production task, and workis very light.SSometimes they stayed there all day and had no work to do.Other times they were very busy with inspections.Eachyeartherewasa"universal inspection" of all the units in the city.This was the busiesttime.Discipline, Punishment

There were two apprentices who were very lazy, and often didn't botherto come to work. They were criticized repeatedly for this, but to no avail.Finally one was transfered to an electric motor factory.TThiswasconsideredpunishment.The leadership was not satisfied with them, because they talkedback to the leaders when they were criticized by them. Of these two, onewas a son of a high military cadre.TThe leader of their unit didn't daretransfer him, so they just transfered the other one.

There were no firings, they just took administrative disciplinary actionsagainst people.There was a girl apprentice who didn't work very hard orobserve strict discipline about coming to work. Once she stayed home.for onemonth without asking for leave.when she came back she said she had beenhelping her family buiid a house.So what did they do?when it came time tobe promoted to regular worker, she was delayed for three months. There isno firing in China except for those who commit criminal offenses.Personal Relations and Factions in the Unit

He describes his unit as small but complex--many people are there andthey are always in some kind of intrigue against one another.HHeusestheterm "small pond, many turtles" (chiqian, wangba duo).

-2-

There were factions in the unit，but not like the CR.Peoplewerejustplaying games with one another in order to get ahead.?They try to intimidateor trick the leadership into doing their bidding and also others are jealousand want to bad mouth you before the leaders.

The competition was fierce--butnot in work as is thee case in Hong Kong.

The competition is in the realmof personal politics, in leaving a favorable impression on the leaders.This is advantageous because then they can get to go to meetings, get favor-able assignments outside, promotions.

They tried to appear as'red'aspossible.

How does one appear 'red'? You make speeches at meetings, volunteerto write criticisms and theoretical articles.You inform on others behindtheir backs.For example, if in the dorms they say something expressingdissatisfaction with the leadership,ssomehowtheleaders knowabout it only2 days later.Someone was informingontheminthedorms--theleadershadtheir secret agents.Relations between people are very complex in China.

An example of the personal politics.There was a political worker(zheng gong yuan) in the plant who the leader did not like, hei said theguy had too much ambition, and was trying to seize his power.SSo he accusedthe guy of trying to buildl up support amonth the workers and of trying toundermine his decisions.

Another example.The leader of the management office was a realbureaucrat, an old cadre, really despicable.

Hewantedtohaveallthepower to himself.  In l974, the upper levels sent in a new party secretaryand gave him his own section to handle political work.

The unit leadersaw this as a threat and resisted the party secretary.

There was a fierceconflict between them for two years, but the new party secretary couldnever establish his authority in the unit.Later the unit leader sentrequests to the top) to move out the party secretary.

He succeeded and hewas removed, and laterthe leader had himself appoirted party secretary.

Everybody in the unit feared this leader, and many hated him.He always criticized people in meetings if he was dissatisfied, or wouldlook for ways to get revenge. He would transfer you out, or would makesure your housing allotment was not enough. Also, he thinks this guy was alittle wierd.(One of the workers had a little son who was about l yearold.whenever this old leader saw him he would grab him, pick him up andsay "oh come here, let me kiss your little bird!"

This was really strange--he even did this in front of the women in the unit..Also, this man wasobscene, dirty (xialiu), he always used dirty words in meetings.sSomeofthe workers called him the "old hoodlum" (lao liumang).He even used badlanguage in front of women. He was an old cadre from the PLA and anti-Japanese war days.The Measurements Institute(6/3/80, 1.5 hrs.)

The top leader was the institute head (suo zhang). He had no previoustraining, he had been an old cadre before liberation.He was paid thesame as a vice-department head, or grade l8.He got over 80¥ a month.There was supposed to be 37 employees, according to the quota.

But they hada few other workers borrowed on transfer from other units.For this reasonsome of hisfriends were worried that they would be transfered out becausethey did not have good relations with the leader.This institute head wasalso party secretary after a while.

Theyhadthefollowingstaffoffices.The directors' office, afinance office, and administrative officee(yewu gu )， which oversees theother 5 offices, and does coordinating work,The balancing office (informant'sunit), the meansurements (changdu) office, the temperatures (regong) office,

-3-the electronics office, the physics and chemistry office, and the technicalinformation office..All of the employees worked in one of these offices.

About 2/3 of the people in the institute were workers.‘Therewerealso a number of technicians.1Five people were administrative cadres.In all, there were 44-45 employees in the institute.Political Study

Before the fall of the Gang of 4, they had political study twoafternoons a week and once during the evening.In the evening, Monday,it was for two hours, from 7-9.TTuesday afternoon and Friday afternoon forfour hours.

Theystudiedsomuchduring work time because they were nota production unit.

They studiedA editorials and politics.Very dull.They talked nonsense.They sometimes had to give speeches because the leader would tell them to.This was the most tiresome thing of all.He and his friends would talk for1-3 minutes, but the activists would go on and on.They also had to writearticles and reports on criticizing Deng, the Gang of Four, and criticizinganarchism.  When they had to write articles they would just: copy the editorialsword for word.[ When other people gave talks they just said exactly what theeditorials said.They didn't dare say what was truly on their minds.Theysat passively, just listening--but nott really paying much attention.Theydidn't dare fall asleep, because they would be criticized.

People could get out of these sessions by asking for sick leave.Almost everybody used this method once in a while.They did not need adoctor's certificate because this was not a production unit.Theywouldjust tell the work mates they were illl and please tell the leader that they

Especiallycould not come.Then they would go home and have a good sleep.in the summer because in Nanningitwassohot.The highs were 37-38 degreesand lows of 27, and there is no ocean breeze like Hong Kong.

They also had manual labor on saturday mornings--they would have ageneral cleanup, pull weeds, etc.If they felt ill and wanted a good sleep,they just went home and asked a friend to tell the leader.Or they wouldcall in after they got home.1Usually this was for half a day or sometimesa whole day, but rarely more than one day.

They also used this excusewhen they wanted to go to the movies

Naturally, attendance rates were very low.The work dayI was from8-122 am, 2:30-5:30pm.In the afternoon they would leave to go out to eatbecause they had no canteen.Butsometimess they returned late..Alsoatl0 there was a break for breakfast, and they would stretch this out tohalf an hour toanhour.

And if there was not much work to do, they wouldjust knock off early and go home.(Of course, things were much stricter infactories and you couldn't get away with all of this.Most people in hisunit came late both in the mornings and afternoon.The dorms were next door,and sometimes people with families would go home during work hours, to cookfor te family.

Where were the leaders during all of this?

They were in the officesreadinggtheir newspapers andresting.After he applied to come to Hong Kongin l976 or so, the leader of the factory put him under surveillance, meaningthat they would come to the factory once or twice a day to see if he wasat work.This made him mad because it meant he had to do work all the time.It also made his coworkers made because they had too show up too, since theleader was always checking.

So they decided to all go outon frequent'inspections' to factories.And they would hang up a signnsayingsoontheir office door. But they would really knock off l-2 hours early on theseinspections.

-4-

Their group leader was a real clever fellow.A university graduatewho knew absolutely nothing about weights and balances. But he like topretend he did and was always giving orders. He never asked the informantfor advice, even though he was a master worker.SSo they didn't teach himanythingbecausetheydidn'tlikehimandfiguredthelessheknewtheless he could supervise their work.

Their leaders were always criticizing them for poor work disciplineand laziness. This made them angry because it just wasn't true(?).1Itwashard to ride your bike in the sun l-2 hours to a factory on inspection.So they would make excuses， say that it was not true, that they were sick.When they did manual labor on Saturdays, there were some cunning types whoworked hard when they saw the leaders coming and they relaxed when theywere gone.They were trying to endear themselves to the leader.Campaigns

There was a series of campaigns in the l970s, all study, no criticismor struggle of anyone in the institute.(This may be possible becausethis was a new unit， so there was no history.

Theunitwasestablishedin l972). They just had study.There was the "one strike and three anti's"(yida sanfan),the "criticism of Lin Biao and Confucius"--confucius wantedto 'restore the rites', etc. There was the critcism of water margin--the leader of the peasant uprising wanted to surrender--a capitulationist.So Mao's instruction was to criticize this book, so they studied it.There was the "study the theory of the proletarian dictatorship" campaigii:They learned that it was necessary to carry out a comprehensive dictatorshipover the bourgeoisie.'There was the "oppose the rightist restorationistwind"--the criticism of the '3 poisonous weeds', a document on scientificand technical work, and two others.They criticized these as espousing the'theory of the productive forces'. After the Tienanmen incident they changedthis to the criticism of Deng Xiaoping.Then there was the criticism of theGang of Four.This was different.The central committee send down real docu-ments and material in addition to editorials.Again, they copied the newspapers.This was the last political movement.

After this they didn't always meet two afternoons a week.TThey oftenjust did their work.After l976 the Monday night political study wascancelled. Technical study classes began to meet on wednesday afternoonsafter thegangof fourfell.

Elections--they were discussing the possibility of electing groupleaders when he left the institute in l978. Actually these were privatediscussions among the workers, they were not organized by the leaders.They had read about this in the newspapers. Once when his group leaderwas giving him a hard time he said--"Don't be so proud, or you'll beout of a job when the elections come!"  The group leader said "well that'sjust fine!", but he didn't like it.

-5-

描述：

