id: b8e616721f
标题：Hong Kong Interviews: Informant No. 66
日期：1980-7-29
是否是时间段：false
作者：Andrew G. Walder
来源：
标签：文章
书籍：Hong Kong Interviews: Informant No. 66
书籍作者：Andrew G. Walder

正文：
INFORMANT NO. 66

PERSONAL DATAAge:26

Sex:FemaleEducation:

primaryschoolgraduateTotal Years Relevant Experience:

10Last Year of Relevant Experience: 1979

Year Left China:1980Initial Immigration Status:LegalNative Place/overseas Connections:

Yunnan native/parents in Hong KongClass Background/Political Designation:

unknown

OCCUPATIONAL HISTORY SUMMARYPositions Held: l) Electrical Switch Factory, Kunming, l970-79

a) apprentice/skilled worker, 1970-78

b) Accountant, Finance Department, 1978-79Administrative Level of Work Unit/(No. of employees);

1） Municipal/(800)

PAGES TEXT:

TOTAL HOURS:2APPOINTMENTS:1

2No. 66Occupational History

(7/29/80, 2 hrs.)

After primary school, at age l6 in 1970, she was assigned to workin a  8oo-person electrical switch factory under the Kunming Heavy IndustryBureau.sShe worked for 7 years as an apprentice, then skilled worker,then the last two years, l978-79, she was an accountant in the financedepartment. She applied to come to Hong Kong and arrived in July l980,just a few weeks ago.  Both of her parents have lived in Hong Kong foryears, and she lives with them now.Wages

There is a three-year apprenticeship period, l5¥, l7￥, and 2l¥ forthefirstthreeyears.Some types of workers only have a two year

She was learning to be a machine-tool operator.TTheirapprenticeship.factory had three shifts, and they got pay differentials of about .25¥per shift for working odd shifts.

They had fixed and formal master-apprentice relations.Themastersdidn't want to give away their knowledge too freely, and would hold backonsometechniques.Not all masters were like this, some only fearedthat you would not learn well enough. HBut hers was a conservative one,and she would not let her see certain operations.

Theytook relativelyy simple tests at the end of three years, given bythe masters.lEach person was given a different task to do--a practical

They were also given a design with a mistake in it and had to correctone.it, also given by oral test. Usually everybody passed. Then after theypassed, they went to their small group meetings where the case of eachcandidate was discussed.' They could be held back from being promoted fora three month period at a time, mostly for bad behavior, no knowledge.

After that, you are grade l, 33.5¥, and after one year, you areautomatically raised to grade 2, 36.7¥.After this, they have to waituntil a national wage readjustment for grade 3 and above.This is whymost workers were grade 2.]It is also why the wage readjustments becamelike a life and death struggle when they finally came in l977. The workersin grades 4 to 8 were all hired in the l950s. She did not get any raisesthe entire time beyond grade 2.

There were no readjustments until 1977.'They set year lines, like forpeople who entered before 1970, 40% could be raised one grade.7Theyuseda lot of criteria, good work, surpassing quotas, winners of competitions,active in study, getting along with others, family economic situations,and number of years since the last raise. The big problem with this isthat the criteria were vague.There were no set standards.]It justdepended on whether or not people had a good impression of you.  It dependedupon your relations with others. Of course, it led to a lot of arguments.It was so severe that people almost came to blows.?This was because therewere no clear rules.

In the recent readjustment, things are better because at least nowthey are testing people's skill levels,iin addition to other criteria.But she did not participate in this second readjustment, because in mid-1979 she entered a university after a successful admissions test.Bonuses

When she first came there, basically there were no bonuses, right upuntil 1977. They did have assessments for advanced workers once a year,gave certificates, towels, or Mao's selected works.

They did have individual quotas, set at the average worker's speed,

-1-but theywere notconnectedwithpay.When they finished, which was easyto do early, they could leave early. Some workers still overfulfilled anyway.But most just fulfilled the quota. If you couldn't finish, they would talkto you or someone would help you finish. If you had good relations withthe group leader or shop director, they wouid give you easier quotas todo. If they didn't like you, they would give you harder ones.

After the Gang of Four fell, they gradually increased the prizes foradvanced workers, and eventually had a full bonus system.  They had groupassessments every month, and the bonuses were tied to beating the time quotas,and they also had piece rate bonuses.SmallGroupManagement

The group leader handled management. They had several 'yuan' whowere appointed, but they had no real use, no real jobs. The group leaderhad the power, he was the one who could sign materials and tools out atthe warehouse, and who gave permission for short leaves of absence. Theydidn't really have a firm quality inspection system.Accounting Work

They had a head accountant, assistant accountant, two cashiers, onetime rate setter, one cost manager, and the department head (guzhang).When she first came she was a cashier-accountant,did both jobs.Theyhandled all the expenditures for the factory, managed accounts and costs.Her work involved simply notifying banks, giving out forms.  They εlsofilled out general accounting reports and sent to the above levels--to thebureau, not to the director. They sum up all the statistical reports onexpenditures in all the shops.

(A good informant, but unfortunately our time is cut short and shecan't come back because her father is opposed, says Hong Kong is verycomplex and she just arrived from China.SShe snuck out of the house tocome this time, accompanied by a mutual friend who introduced her.)

一2一

描述：

