id: b355527908
标题：Hong Kong Interviews: Informant No. 11
日期：1980-3-6,1980-3-7
是否是时间段：false
作者：Andrew G. Walder
来源：
标签：文章
书籍：Hong Kong Interviews: Informant No. 11
书籍作者：Andrew G. Walder

正文：
INFORMANT NO. 11PERSONAL DATA

Sex:  MaleAge:42Education:University graduate (chemical fibres)

19Total Years Relevant Experience:Last Year of Relevant Experience: l979

Year Left China: 1979Initial Immigration Status: Legal

Shanghai native/parents in U.S.Native Place/Overseas Connections:

professional (zhiyuan)Class Background/Political Designation:

OCCUPATIONAL HISTORY SUMMARYPositions Held:  l) Technician, Chemical Fibres Plant, Shunde County,

Guangdong (under construction), 1961-642) Staff Technician, Canton Textile Research Institute,

1964-79Administrative Level of Work Unit/(No. of employees):

1)unknowm

2) Municipal/(l60)Experience in Full-time Manual Labor (for non-worker occupations):

May 7 Cadre School, 6 mos., 1969APPOINTMENTS:2

TOTAL HOURS: 3

PAGES TEXT:

4No.11Occupational History

(3/6/80, 2 hrs.)

Theinformant is 42years old，bornandraisedinShanghai.lHis fatherwas a wealthy Shanghai doctor before liberation.He entered university in 1957,a difficult year to enter university, because it was the first year that therewere more students than places since liberation.

Soitwasdifficultforhimto get into the universities he would have liked.He attended the East ChinaTextile College (huadong fangzhi gongxue yuan), and graduated in l96l. Hestudied chemical fibres.

In l96l he was assigned to the Shunde Chemical Fibres plant inGuangdong Province, under the Textile Ministry.

This was to be a new,large plant, and was still being built. The local people didn't want it therebecause of the pollution, and they thought it would influence their cropsof rice and sugar.It was still under construction, and there were notany buildings.He was given the job of teaching technical classes in pre-paration for the opening of the plant.The construction was on again, off again,since l96l-64 was a period of readjustment in the economy, and unprofitableplants were being closed.  Also, the local County officials opposed theplant, so there were a number of changes of plans along the way. First theCounty ordered construction to stop as part of the 'readjustment'， then theprovince ordered it to start again.Finally, in 1964 the Textile Ministrydecided the project should be abandoned.Construction was stopped withoutany products ever being produced. 1All personnel were dispersed to otherunits.

During these 4 years I had a lot of spare time, did a lot of reading,sleeping, shopping.Then he was transferred in l964 to the Canton MunicipalTextileResearchInstitute,where he workeduntilAprill979.This institutewas under the Canton Municipal Textile Bureau, and had about l6o employees.From 1964-69 he worked in the materials office (qingbao shi) or 1ibrary ofthe institute.He did translations from Japanese into Chinese, and also someEnglish to Chinese.

During l969, he went to a rural May 7 Cadre School in the Cantonsuburbs for 6 months. Later he returned to the institute, became a researcher,and did chemical experiments in a laboratory.Cadre Wages

When he first graduated, he was a practicing (jianxi) technician,got paid equivalent to grade l4, but was not an assistant technician, andwas not called grade l4.AAfter l year he was raised to regular technician,andwagessetatgradel3.1During that year, Guangdong was experimentingwith the merging and collapsing of the technician and administrative cadrescales.But it didn't work and they returned to the national system.Inhis first year he made 52.5¥, and 62￥ his second year.

The grades for technical cadres went from l-l5.Grades 1-9 were calledengineers.  Gradesl0-l3 were called technicians, and l4 and l5 were assistanttechnicians. Grade l3 and above were where recent university graduates started.Grades l4 and 15 were where graduates of middle school level technicalschools were assigned.Also the 2 year university-level technical schoolgraduates became assistant technicians.

But the people from the middle-school level technical schools could become either assttechnicians or skilledworkers.  The assistant technicians could gradually be promoted to abovegrade l3, however. TThe top gradess l-5 were called 'high level intellectuals'(gaoji zhishi fenzi).

I was stuck at grade l3 right up until l978, when he was raisedto grade l2 during the wage readjustment.Peoplewereselectedduringthiswage readjustment in small groups, and they also had forms where they filled

-1-in their length of service, time of their last raise,etc.They chose mostlyof the basis of length of service without raise, but did hold back othersbecause of bad work performance.There were no tests.Forty percent ofthe staff received raises, according to the regulations.

There was also a readjustment inl963 for those who had graduatedin 1958.They were raised one grade, and a very small number with good

There were no other readjustments for cadres,work were raised 2 grades.although he heard of one for workers in l972.

There was no bonus system at the institute, and no supplementarywages.But theydid have wage supplements when they did work with poisonouschemicals.  1Although people were dissatisfied with this system, theseintellectuals, as was common in China, were timid (danxiao), since they oftenhad bad class designations(chushen).

Butthisdidn'tmucheffecttheirwork habits, they couldn't protest or do anything.They just kept working.Also compared with other people in society, their lot wasn't all that bad.Personal Files (dang an)

The cadre department handled the files on employees.

The departmentwas under the institute's Political Department (zhengzhi bu). The politicaldepartment had been set up by the bureau of the city.

They kept the files ina special room, and each year they gave cadres a form to fili out on themselvesand their families.

They were to report their personal histories and thoseof their relatives.

People were afraid to write incorrect information inthese forms because that eould be used against them later. So they wouldkeep an extra copy of the previous year's form in their desk to make surethat next year they would make no mistakes.Politics, Cultural Revolution

There were no 4 cleans work teams sent to his unit during thisperiod, but the bureau did take a few people with good political behaviorand good class background to participate in work teams sent out to ruralareas.During tthe winter of 1966 I was away in Shanghai on business anddecided to stay there, because before there had been a lot of pressure inthe unit to study, listen to political speeches, criticisms, and he hatedthis.He would not even pretend to listen. So he stayed several monthsin Shanghai with his family.

During the next 3 years he was able to spend 2 years in Shanghai,coming back to Canton from time to time。1During the same 3 years hecontinued to work, but not to much effect. He still made trips to differentunits around the country on business, but these other units were usuallydisrupted also, so he often returned to Canton with nothing to show for hisefforts.He did not pay much attention to politics, so he really can'tremember much about the CR.1His unit leader once criticized him for notminding politics at all.1He used to sleep during study meetings, and neverread a political or economic article in the newspaper.1He only readchemistry, and stories.

But during the CR in his unit, since his hand at writing was sogood, he was often asked to write slogans and wallposters, which he did.Generally, he feels that this period was a complete waste of time.  Ifthis was his attitude, how did he escape criticism?  He always wrotewallposters, sometimesslate into the night (it was not matter, his wifehad been assigned work in a different part of China anyway), so theywere grateful to him among the activist organizations.Also，his workrecord was flawless, had never been in trouble politically before, eventhough he had no interest in political matters at all.He also had goodfriendlyrelations witheveryone in the institute.

-2-

Who were the activists?  Party members and workers.They hadtechnical workers in the labs to carry out experiments according to design.They tended to be active.1Basically, there were two groups.First therewas a group close to the Party, people who were in good with the Party.These people tended to be conservative.(Others were those who had been introuble or who had been criticized before.They later became rebels. Thenthere was the 'free and unfettered' faction (xiaoyao pai)， of which hewasamember.These people were either uninterested in politics or wereafraid to enter in because of bad class background.

But gradually thesize of this middle group diminished as people were pressured to joinone faction. or another. It was dangerous not to participate in a faction.InstituteConnectionswithFactories6(3/7/80, 1 hr.)

The institute was led by the Municipal Textile Bureau, and bythe Municipal Scientific and Technical Committee. When enterprises inthe Bureau's6 system had problems to solve, it was the institute's responsibilityto help them solve them.Sometimes they would dispath an institute memberto the plant, and sometimes the plant would send technicians or workersto the institute for experimentation using their facilities.Small exper-iments were done at the institute, and large ones at the plants.Investigations--"cleaning of the Class Ranks"

Around the fall of l968, they began a 'cleaning of the class ranks'campaign.They established 'special investigation groups' (zhuan'an zu)to investigate cases of people whose cases couldn't be cracked by criticismsessions.These were the people who wouldn't bend and confess.  TTheywere also people whose backgrounds looked suspicious after thumbingthrough their personal files.

So they would establish these groups.

Most of the members were partymembers or people with good class backgroundss or good politics.Only a fewprivilieged ones within these special investigation groups could read thefiles.The groups were supposed to question other people about the accusedperson's behavior.At that time, several hotels were set aside especially formembers of these groups who were travelling to different cities, people'shome towms, to dig up information about people's pasts.

Each unit andrailway station set up a reception center (jieshao chu) organized to introducethese people to the right places, hotels.  Hotels in a city were dividedinto three types of use.First, those for investigations workers.  Second,those from enterprises'supply departments who are traveling around to concludecontracts for raw materials and other products.

Third, there were those setaside for general business use--technicians like the informant who werevisiting other units or research institutes, going to meetings or inspection

This practicevisits.The best hotels were set aside for the investigators.did not stop until the 1970s.:In his owm unit, none of those put under thiskind of investigation were ever actually found to have done something wrong.The peopleeaccusedjustgraduallyreturned to their former status.

After the cleaning of the class ranks campaign, a revolutionarycommittee was established, and one PLA representative from the bureau camea few times to check up on things, to try and prevent the regular beatingsbeing given to those who were subject to current investigations, and toguide the establishement of the RC. The investigation subjects, about7-8 people, were kept at night in a basement room in the bureau officebuilding.Revolutionary Committee

The original director of the institute was made the RC head.  She wasa Thai overseas Chinese, a Party member, who had gone to Yenan in 1938 to

-wihelpresisttheJapanese.Later she did underground work in Peking in theDecember 9 movement. Her husband was the Chairman of the Municipal Scientificand Technical Commission.  She had known Mao, Jiang Qing in Yenan but hadalways been afraid to answer questions about that period put to her byher friends.

There was one worker representative, a vice-head, who was also aParty1 member. He didn't have any real power so the researchers in lateryears would tease him, callinghimn'head'(zhuren)，because he had only thetitle and no power. Since he was only a worker, despite his Partyymembershiphis grade rank was not high enough to read certain documents, and attendcertain kinds of Party meetings, so he was really left aside in the shuffle.Since the institute director had higher Party administrative status, she hadall the power and could control all things behind the scenes since theworker representative was restricted by Party regulations in what he couldknow, and was cut off from important documents and meetings.Instituteresearchers all called him 'head' right up until l979.

The cleaning of the class ranks campaign was a pretty tense time.Everybody was forced to stay at the institute, and no one could returnhome.

How was this worker selected for the RC?  He wasn't a leader ofeither faction of rebels, nor was he even an activist. He was chosen moreor less as a compromise.Very few faction leaders were Party members.Like the case of Wu Guixian from Xianyang, Shanxi, at the State CottonMill No.l (this is near Xian).She had beena labor modle during theCultural Revolution, andwas a party member, but she did not participatein .either faction during the cultural revolution.  When the call for thegreat alliance came, factions fought even harder with one another andcouldnotdecide.So she became the compromise representative, becauseshe was a woman, labor model, party member, etc.

Later she was promotedall the way up to the Central.Committee.

OnlyI one person stood aside during the Cultural Revolution for anylength of time--an insititute vice-director,a grade four enginner (224¥ permonth)who had worked in the personnel department as the department headin a factory owmed bythe family of Rong Yiren in Canton.Before liberationhe had ealier gone to the Us to study management also, and all the old

He was finally restored to his postslaoban of Canton's factories knew him.only last year (l979), but had previously had his name restored in l978.Ganqingand Guanxi

People in enterprises and institutes had personal friendships andenmities that often got in the way of the implementation of policies.Partyof this is called 'going through the back door'. Personal relations oftenformed into two groups, and after the Cultural Revolution these groups werenot always related to politics.The problem seems to have been worse after theCR.They had this before, of course, but it was not so serious as far ashe remembers.  I can't really explain why, its very complex.

Part of the problem wassthe newly promotedcadres of the CR period.There were also resentments over past criticisms, and also a split betweenthose with and without good technical training for the jobs they filled.There were additional resentments about very low wages of the younger peoplewho had never received wage: raises despite promotions.TThereweremanyreasons, and these personal relations in a unit are just too complex toexplain clearly.

-4-

描述：

