id: 4ea22f4eba
标题：Hong Kong Interviews: Informant No. 37
日期：1980-5-8,1980-5-9
是否是时间段：false
作者：Andrew G. Walder
来源：
标签：文章
书籍：Hong Kong Interviews: Informant No. 37
书籍作者：Andrew G. Walder

正文：
INFORMANT NO. 37PERSONAL DATA

Sex:MaleAge:35Education:Industrial College graduate

12Total Years Relevant Experience:Last Year of Relevant Experience: l978

Year Left China:  1978Initial Immigration Status: LegalNative Place/overseas Connections:

Thailand 0S, returned 1950

OSClass Background/Political Designation:

OCCUPATIONALHISTORYSUMMARYPositions Held:  l) Staff Technician, Metallurgy Institute (Aeronautics),

Xinjiang, 1967-682) Staff Technician, Electronics Research Institute,

sma1l Guangdong city, 1968-713) Technician, Technical Department, Tractor Factory,

small Guangdong city, 197l-744) Staff member, Municipal Scientific Commission, small

Guangdong city, 1974-78Administrative Level of Work Unit/(No. of employees):

1)Ministry2）Municipal/(400)

3) Municipal/(2000)Experience in Full-time Manual Labor (for non-worker occupations):

none mentionedAPPOINTMENTS:  2

TOTAL HOURS:4.5

PAGES TEXT:

6No.37Occupational History (5/8/80, 2 hrs.)

The informant is a Thai-born overseas Chinese who returned to Chinaaround 1950, at age 5.He graduated in l967 from South China IndustrialCollege in Canton.He studied electronics and automatic machinery.Thenhe was assigned to a Metallurgy Institute in Xinjiang, which was attachedto a large Steel enterprise which had over l0,0oo employees, and which madesteel beams and other large parts for use in manufacturing airplanes.1Hisinstitute was located in Tulufan(Turfan).Actually, his enterprise wassplit up into many small branch factories,cdispersed around this area ofXinjiang.

This was in the 'third line' of production, a secret installation,making products for military use.The plant was directly under the CentralMetallurgy Ministry.ItwasnotrunbytheeprovincebutdirectlyfromPeking.

His job as a technician was to direct and teach people in installing,and maintaining automated equipment and production lines.1Hewasalsoresponsible for disassembling and analyzing qutomatic control machinerybought from Japan and West Germany which was relatively advanced, and drawingup plans for production so that China could copy the design and manufacturetheir own.He also travelled around to various areas for meetings involvedwith metallurgy ministry work, and attended meetings for exchanges ofadvanced experiences, and meetings for signing contracts for procurement ofmaterials (dinghuo huiyi).

The 'goods ordering meetings' were very important because the ministrywould never provide enough materials andequipment to meet targets, so theywould go to these large meetings to findother plants who could supplythem (more on this later).He worked in Xinjiang for lk years, then wastransfered to Guangdong province, to a towm on the peninsula north of Hainanisland.

This new unit was an electronics research institute of about 4oopeople, under the city's6 machinery and electronics bureau (jidian ju).Theinstitute was connected with a radio factory.They researched, designed,and found materials for the production of radio tubes.]Intheprocesstheyvisited plants throughout the country who made these tubes, and found outwhat materials were needed, what equipment, etc.

They would bring the productsback，rmake up a prototype, and send them back to theedepartment which origi-nally put in the request.After they came up with a prototype, they stillhad another step to go through.They had to go to meetings in Peking.Shanghai, Nanjing, Jinan, or other places to make sure that the tube fitthe specificationss for both production and use so that it would be standardizedfor use throughout the country.If not, they would require them to makechanges before they could send the prototypes and the drawings to the factoriesfor large-scale production.

He worked here for over 2 years, and then in l97l (near the end of theyear), he was transfered to a tractor factory in the same town which hadover2000eemployees.He worked in the technical department (jishu ke).Their job was largely designing, and he worked himself on the designing of themachine tools and equipment used in manufacturing tractor parts.This wasalso under the local city's machinery and electronics bureau, although theproduction plans came from the provincial level.

He worked here for over 2 years, and in July l974 he was transfered tothe municipality's Scientific Commission (kexue weiyuanhui).Thiscommitteewas responsible for directingg the work of all the research institutes andfactory technical work in units run by the city.He worked here for fouryears until he came to Hong KongJ 1egally in 1978.This committee had over 20

-1-members, all were technical cadres. Their job was to study advanced foreignand national scientific and technical developments and write up a manualdescribing developments, classified by line of work.  Then they distributedit to all the industrial production and research institutes.?Thenifaunit was interested in a certain technique, they would help them to enterinto production or get more material.

They got their materials from scientific units in Peking and Canton,and some from Hong Kong.The scientific committee was under the localrevolutionary committee.The leader of the committee was not a technician,but an administrative cadre, who was also a member of the revolutionarycommittee.The informant came to Hong Kong legally in l978, after havingapplied to come out in l97l.Wages

When he first graduated and was sent to Xinjiang, his wage was 78 permonth. He says he was a grade l7 technical cadre, while grade l8 was thelowest (it is possible this is an assignment on the administrative cadrescale). After he went to Guangdong in l969, his wages were not lowered,because he was moving from a high to low wage region and they don't normallylower your wages in that situation. But if you move from a low to highwage area, they do give you an increase. He was only given a 3¥ reductionwhich was some sort of regional differential.First year university graduatesin his Guangdong unit got 58, so there was a big difference involved.Because he had such high wages, he was not given any raises or promotionsuntil he left. He was still grade l7 cadre then.

There were two wage readjustments while he was working in China. Onewas in 1978, and one actually was right after he left.So in 1977 and 1979they had them. There were no other wage readjustments to his recollection.Transfers

He was transfered many times.The one from Xinjiang back to Guangdongwas by request. He applied to the local organizational department, andalso to the leader of his unit. He said his mother was alone in Guangdong,very old, etc., and said that they were an overseas family, and should get

After he got his approval, he still wasn't successful.good treatment.He still had to write a letter himself to the organization departmentof the Guangdong area, asking if there was any unit needing someone withhis specialty. All of this took him half a year. The other transferswithin his town in Guangdong were all arranged by the bureau in chargeof his units.Bonuses

Not until he got to the tractor factory in l97l-74 did he run intobonuses or labor awards, but even then there was no money involved.Butthey did give towels and wash basins and pitchers to advanced workers.Thefactory did not have bonuses until after he left, but did have them in1975-76, he is certain, right before Deng Xiaoping fell from power.Theydivided the bonuses into 3 grades after assessments: l2¥， 9¥, and 6¥.The bonuses in the light industry system in his locality were lower.Therewere limits set by the bureau about what percentage of workers couldreceive bonuses, etc.Procurement Meetings (dinghuo huiyi)  (5/9/80, 2.5 hrs.)

These meetings are the regular outlet for goods produced according toplan. The national plan comes down once a year, and they hold two national

-2-contract-signing meetings per year.

One is at the end andone at the beginningof the year.These are organized by the ministries in Peking, but they areheldindifferent areas.The meetings are divided by province, and eachprovince has meetings to reveal what kinds of products each enterprise isproducing, getting buyers and seller together.

Both sellers and buyers

This was the situation in the metallurgy ministrycome to these meetings.

They had people from machinery and aircraft enterprises.meetings.

There were two types of people in attendance.1First， sellers whohave produced X amount of goods according to the plant (and maybe evenoverfulfilled by a little) and who0 now have no buyers.They notify theconcerned ministry or bureau, who collects this kind of informatin togetherperiodically and publishes a catalog to distribute to all enterprises.

Second, there are the buyers, who have plans to meet but the equipmentand material supplied by the state is not enough.

Sothey ask( permission tobuy extra materials, usuallyIget it， and attend these meetingstosigncontracts.In signing contracts, personal contacts are very important,since people tend to go to friends and previous acquaintances.

If you don'thave good connections, it is hard to be successful at this.These are notgoods that are bad in quality.

The bad quality materials are sent to'daily use articles' (minyong) plants, which produce goods for consumers.If after a contract is fulfilled, the goods are defective, then the buyernotifies the seller, and the producirg plant sends out inspectors. If itis truly bad stuff, then the producer will take back the bad productsand replace them.1If they don't agree, then they discuss things, and askthe ministry to mediate.

There are also other problems, especially on-time delivery.If aplant doesn't deliver on time, then the buyer will notify the ministry.which will criticize the named plant at the materials procurement meetings,and it will be embarrassing to the plant and maybe make it difficult to

They money for these transactions are released upon delivery.sigmcontracts.Payment is made by notifying the bank, which transfers the sum to theseller's account.

If one is still unsuccessful after these organized meetings, then younotify the ministry, who is supposed to try to find a seller for you.

Afterall, they told you to produce X amount， and now that there is X amountproduced or almost finished, you don't have a buyer, and are left holdingthe goods.But the ministry or bureau doesn't always worry about you thatmuch, so this is not guaranteed.So often one must go by the back doorto make do.You use personal relationships to smooth out needs.He declaresthat this is the special characteristic of China's enterprise management.This is called 'relying on personal affection' (siren ganqing) to getneeded materials.

These kinds of transactions take place by discussing what eachperson's enterprise needs, and exchanging the materials.But some of thesepeople are more exacting, and will ask for sewing machines, bicycles,foodstuffs, clothing, types of vegetable oil, for their personal useeto

This is the great special characteristic of Chinesesmooth the transaction.enterprise management.:If you can't: accomplish something through the plan,if you can't meet targets within the plan, they you can always use personalconnections to accomplish targets.

From the Dinghuo Huiyi to the personal,outside-the-plan exchanges, it all relies on guanxi.

This is brought aboutby the fact of high targets, and scarcity of equipment and materials.

These direct exchanges between plants are not illegal.Theministriesput emphasis on production and are willing to allow this kind of activity if

But the personal graft is not legal, and isit helpstocompleteplans.

-3-considered corruption.

So if you are caught accepting a bicycle or foodstuffsfor personal use, then this is considree corruption.They don't actuallycall this 'corruption' (tanwu), but making use of special privileges, butit is still frowned upon.When they discover these cases, if they are notsevere, then they will just criticize those involved.1If it is a seriouscase, they will transfer the person to another epartment. Also it ispossible for repeated offenders, and very serious offenders to be put intojail.Other Ministry System Meetings

They had other meetings within the metallurgy system led by the politicaldepartment of the Ministry， twice a year.(One was the 'Act in the spirit ofcentral metallurgy ministry directives' (guanche zhongyang yejin bu de jingshen) meetings.This was about political issues, but they were related to

They would stress the importance of fulfilling plans for theproduction.good of the country, and hear reports on each enterprises plan fulfilment,progress of their political movements, etc. If there is a problem,1youalsohave to report and discuss it here.The results of these two different kindsof meetings were::l) to let the ministry know the progress of plan completionfor each enterprise, and the problems encountered; 2） to spread informationto all enterprises in the ministry about each unit's capabilities, products,and production situation; 3) facilitate circulation of materials, supplies, andequipment within the ministry (and sometimes without); and 4) to assurecompletion of the ministry's plan.

Most of the people who participate in the goods ordering meetings arefromwithintheministry'ssystem.But if a plant from, for example, themachine building ministry needs a certain kind of steel, and he can'tget it through normal channels in his own ministry, then he must get thepermission of the metallurgy ministry, make his case, then attend andtry to sign a contract.

These meetings were primarily related to productinn plans.  All duringthis period the profit target existed and a plant got to keep a certain per-centage of profit for use in improving worker's welfare. But during theCR period this became smaller, because plants found it difficult to fulfilltheir plans.Cultural Revolution

While at the institute in Xinjiang, they had workers organizations,criticisms of the intellectuals andoffice workers.They were especiallyhard on those with bad class backgrounds, and historical problems.Hewas sent to work in the shops of one of the branch plants, not allowed togo to goods procurement meetingss in the ministry anymore, and give distastefulwork to do.This was during the period of the cleaning of the class rankscampaign, during the second half of the first year he was there, in l968.

When he first arrived in Turfan in mid-l967, things were still prettyquiet. It was not until l968 that things started to turn into disorder.At the beginning of the movement, there were not 2 factions. Just "RedGuards" who were workers of good class backgrounds.They wrote wallpostersattacking the leadership of the plant, their bureaucratic attitudes andworkstyles, and especiallyI went after those with bad class backgrounds.Theyaaccused them of beingI capitalist roaders, followers of Liu Shaoqi.

They did not have factionalism until later, when some of the intellectuals,people who had been criticized or had been fearful earlier, began to opposethe red guards and tried to protect themselves and leading cadres.This was also the period when production began to be affected.Whenagroup

-4-leader or shop director was criticized as a 'royalist', and accused ofhaving close relations with the party secretary, they would investigatethe person, see how often he got to go to goods procurement meetingsand other outside functions,and then accuse him of being a 'running dog'or 'lackey' of the person in power.

When this happened, workers stoppedlistening to hisSorders.

Right when things started to go into disorder, he transfered backto Guangdong·

They had just gotten to the point of having the leadershipstep aside at that time.

They saw the handwriting on the wall, so he askedthe first party secretary to get him transfered back to Guangdong beforehe was knocked down.He had good relations with this secretary, and hadgond to the goods procurement meetingss with him before. He had real goodganging.and has kept up with the man, and seen him several times since.The man was soon thereafter knocked down, and sent to a May 7 cadre schoolfor four years before his transfer to another unit in Qingdao, where heis now a bureau head, a position which carriess the same gradeerankashis Xinjiang post.Now he has a great deal of power， and has been a cadrefor 36 years in the party.They had accused him of being a 'traitor'(pantu), but after years of investigation they finally cleared him, andfound that the changes were unfounded.

When he got to Guangdong, this was right during the high tide of themovement.This new unit's production was very seriously affected.Theyonly worked at half capacity, but never really stopped completely.

The

The red guardsfirst Party secretary1 in the plant had not stood aside.couldn't knock him dowm because he was an old revolutionary cadre from thepre-l949 Red Army.  He steered a middle course between factions, and did notexpress opinions on one or the other.1He had a peasant background.

By this time, they had several cadres who had stood aside because theyhad bad class backgrounds.A vice-secretary, several department heads,(the vice-secretary was also the plant director).Shop directors and groupleaders did not stand aside because they were usually of good class background.At this time the informant continued his technical work.iAlthough he wasan overseas Chinese, he was not as bad as a capitalist or landlord.HHedidnot participate in manual labor again until the cleaning of the class rankscampaign, when he was sent to do manual labor.

This wasa fearfultimeofinvestigation for people of questionable class backgrounds in China.Theyinvestigated people and if they found a historical problem they would bringdown the club.

In his own case, they found out his father had been a capitalistin Thailand, and accused him of exploiting foreign workers.

So they wentaround looking for other Thai Chinese to ask them about his father.Theinformant had in the past wrote letters to his father, and had gotten lettersback from him,aalong with letters from workers under his father, attesting

So he took these lettersto his good treatment of his employees.

He was struggled two or threeas evidence, and went to criticism meetings.

They hung a verytimes where they shouted at him, accused him of lying.heavy steel plate around his neck. It was very painful, but they wouldn'tlet him lower his neck.

was organized by the Mao Thought Worker Propaganda

ThiswholethingTeam--which included both soldiers and workers.They tried to get him toadmit his father's guilt,and repudiate his father and cut off relations

He was sent to a May 7 cadre school for overwith him, but he refused.

This was in 1969-70.These 'schools' were actually laborhalf a year.reform campsfor cadres.They grew sugar cane and peanuts.Finally in 1970they started to implement the overseas Chinese policy, and finally released him.

5-His own case was helped by his father's letters to the foreign ministry,which subsequently ordered his locality to release him.

When he returned to his unit the propaganda team was still there,and was very polite to him this time, but he just ignored them.  Hereturned in February l97l, and in September l97l or so he was transfered tothe Tractor Factory.

When he got there, he got along well with the partysecretary who headed the Revolutionary Committee and also the departmenthead of the technical department.They also liked his technical abilities,so he was allowed to do his work, and return to his specialfy.Revolutionary Committee, 197l-74

Vice-head was also the party secretary, and had been transfered in afterthe close of the CR. One vice-head was the vice-party secretary, who wasleft over from before the CR, and was an old worker. He was actuallythe head of the revolutionary committee, while the party secretary wasthe highest authority in the plant.The other five members:the head ofthe security department, an incumbent from before the CR who originallyhad been a demobilized soldier, a union cadre who was the top unionofficial, the vice-head of the union who was an old worker, the headof the women's committee, and the head of the finance department.

All of these people were members of the Party Committee.The'mass representatives' were the women's representative, union heads--the heads of the mass organizations. This was all the members. TheMao-Thoughtpropaganda team was still there, and they did not leave until1974. They still had departments (called gu), and they were not combinedtogether or abolished.  The propaganda team led political work, meetings,campaigns, but it was the party secretary who decided major problems.Technical Education

They had a worker's university in the unit.They studied technology--math, drawing, etc. This was for a select group of workers with good politi-cal showing.They used several afternoons a week for study, it was notspare-time, but used production time.  The informant participated as a teacherinthese classes.But he says they graduatedafter four years regardlessof their level of accomplishment, and their level was not always high.They didn't take the tests seriously.

-6-

描述：

