id: ec212209dc
标题：Hong Kong Interviews: Informant No. 13
日期：1980-3-8
是否是时间段：false
作者：Andrew G. Walder
来源：
标签：文章
书籍：Hong Kong Interviews: Informant No. 13
书籍作者：Andrew G. Walder

正文：
INFORMANT NO. 13PERSONAL DATA

Sex:MaleAge:29Education:

middle school, incompleteTotal Years Relevant Experience:

7Last Year of Relevant Experience: l978

Year Left China:1978

unknown, probably legalInitial Immigration Status:Native Place/Overseas Connections:China native/oS connections unknownClass Background/Political Designation:

unknown

OCCUPATIONALHISTORYSUMMARYPositions Held: 1) Coal mine, Heilongjiang, 1972-78

a） Coal miner and repair worker, 1972-73b) Procuring agent, Supply Department, Office

worker in Finance and Personnel Departments,

1973-78Administrative Level of Work Unit/(No. of employees):

1) Ministry/ (l5,000+)APPOINTMENTS:1

TOTALHOURS:3

PAGES TEXT:3No. 13Occupational History(3/8/80, 3 hrs.)

He worked from l972-78 in a coal mine in Heilongjiang.

Therewere15,0oo or more workers and staff in the mine bureau, which included four minesin all. This was under the Coal Mining Ministry, and the mines were begunin l958.In the mine he worked in, there were over 5000 workers6 and staff.He had been an intellectual youth in a villagee for 3 years, then sent to themine.He had earlier studied in middle school for one year before the school

After that he was sent down towas closed duringgtheCulturalRevolution.the countryside.

When he was first assigmed to the mine, he did 6 months of manual laborin the coal shafts.Then he was transfered the machinery repair department,responsibly for the maintenance of machinery. as a repair worker.Thiswas above ground.(One year later, he was transferred to the supply department,

This was part of the policy of'using workersbut was still considered a worker.to taketheplace of cadres'(yigong daigan).His job was to travel around andconclude contracts for materials and supplies needed by the mine.Diesel, fuel,andmachineoilwerethemainthings.He carried out this business withothers units that his mine already had good relations with.Usually he wentto places like Shanghai, Zhejiang.

He did this work for 3 years.He also workedfor 6 months in the .finance department, and half a year in the personneldepartment.Wages,Labor

Starting workers at the mine began at grade 4, 52¥.There was alsoa regional supplement of lo%, and other supplements. It all came to 80+¥ permonth for a new worker.Workers above the ground start at grade 2， 39¥, witha regionalsupplement of 1o%.There were no grade l workers, quite a fewgrade 7's, but 5 and 6 were the most common.

Therewereonly two grade 8's,and about 25 grade 7's.

There were no raises during the period he worked there.

When he wasshifted to above-ground work his wages were dropped to grade 3, at 46¥ plusthe lo% supplement, which made over 5o¥.while he was there, there wasonly one wage readjustment, in l977. Earlier he had heard from older workersthat there were many readjustments before the CR, in l960, 1962, 1964.In l977 they were allowed to give raises to 46% of the workers.First, thosewho had worked over 7years and were still grade 2 were raised to grade 3.1Amongtbose left over, they raised by one gradeeaccording to work activism.

There were no bonuses during this period, and they still hadn't insti-tuted them when he left in June l978.He had heard that they had piece ratesduring 1962-3, but that they stopped them soon thereafter.this was payaccording to the number of tons of coal moved, and called the 'bao gong'system (a kind of 'contract labor'system).

Money was paidaccordingtooutput.

Temporary laborers ordinarily were not used.But they did hire some in1976, because there were productinn problems.They were hired from villages,worked for a fixed period of one year.Their wages were slightly higher thanordinary workers, and the better ones were kept on as regular workers thereafter.This was specially permitted because normally this was illegal.

Yes, there was an effect on worker activism.of this condition wherethere were no raises for years.1First, workers hadn't had raises for a longtime.Second, if you worked hard you still got the same wage as those whodidn't.'There were other effects besides slow work.Waste went up.Peopledidn't care if they wasted materials or if they broke something.

They just-1-gotanewone.They would use machine oil for their fires to keep warm.They also asked for sick leave for even small things, especially if theyhad good relations with the doctor.

The cadres knew this was a problem, but they were also pretty

Why??Cadres knewthat duringthe Gang of 4mediocre (mama huhu) themselves.period to be too hard working would be to risk putting production in command

This was called the 'theory of putting produc-and having a label put on you.

Theylost about 2¥ foreachtion first'.His mine lost money every year.ton of coal mined. The state set a target on the loss rate for each ton,but the mine 'surpassed' this target too.It still didn't matter.Theywere given supplementary money and the leaders were never punished for this.There were also too many workers above the ground, and not enough below.Hethinks this is due to0'going through the back door'.Workers gradually wereable to use connections to get transferred to the top, and this happened tothe point that there were too many up there for the work to be done.Mine Organization

The group(ban)was the basic unit, about l5 workers.The groupleader (banzhang) is appointed by the mineshaft supervisor (jing zhang), whois equivalent to a department head level cadre.?There is also a vice groupleader appointed in the same way.The selections in both cases are actuallymade by the branch Party secretary.Thesegroup0leaders are not always

TheirParty members.ThebasicC criteria is that they are active in labor.responsibility is to direct workers, and keep an eye on safety conditions.Every3groups comprises a section, with a section chief (duan zhang) wholeads3groups, and who is partly aeparated from production.There are no

There are many sections. Above the sectionsofficesbelowtheground.were mineshafts (jingkou),and there were a total of 8 mineshafts in hismine (kuang).The mineshaft supervisor (jing zhang))wasequivalent todepartment head, while the mine director (kuang zhang) was equivalent toa bureau level department (chu) head.

electrical

The groups divide labor internally. One worker minds thegenerator.Anothertwosetthedynamite.Others drill，others dig the coaland put it in carts, and the carts are taken to the surface.(Other workersare responsible for buildingg tracks, and installing beams. These workerswork in a different section,tthe basic construction section.Responsibilitysystems--workers are not allowed to smoke or sleep in the mine.

Workers arenot responsible for anything else except work.Union and Party Organization

They had a union, which did not cease functioning during the period,but it had no real power or functions.They did a few things like extra-curricular activities for workers, and handled welfare arrangements.Theynever had a workers' congress.They did have a militia.

There were very few party members among the workers.There wereabout600orsoworkers6in his mineshaft, and only about 15 Party members.The branch party office was located alongwith the mine shaft office.Therewas a mine revolutionary Committee (kuang geming weiyuan hui)in his mine,which was named the 'East Wind' nmine.The RC had lo+ members.The Partysecretary was the chairman, the mine director and vice-director were viceheads.Theothermemberswereleadingcadresfrom other units.One wasa mass representative, a former member of the rebel faction.Therewasnofactionalism in the mine left over from the CR.The plant did not have anyproduction problems6duringthat period aside from the many accidents whichclaimed a number of lives every year.

-2-Political Study

Every day before work for one half hour theywould have politicalstudy, usually newspapers or documents.TThey did not have small groups,Before the shift, more than loo workers from the mine shaft would assemblein the hall and the shaft supervisor, a party member, would read the documents.Workers didn't really listen, some slept.  This form of political study didnot change, even when there was a movement like Pi Lin Pi Kong， the criticismof Deng, or the criticism of the Gang of 4 (which also saw wallposters putup by workers). These kinds of movements did not influence the mine verymuch.There were no real changes in the mine after the Gang of 4 fell.No changes in leadership or in organization up to the time he left.Administration

The mining bureau was organized as follows.It was under theCoal Ministry in Peking.Their mining bureau (kuangwu ju) was under amunicipalgovernment.Therewerefour mines(kuang）inthebureau.Therewas also a coking plant, a machinery plant, and an electrical generationplant.

There were not enough cadres to go around in the department offices ofhis mine, so a few workers, like the informant, worked in the offices asworkers.They kept their worker grades and pay but did desk work. Since theydidn't have fixed positions, they moved around a lot.

There were few apprentices in the mine, just for skilled work likeinstalling electrical equipment. Miners did not go through an apprenticeshipperiod.

-3-

描述：

