id: f20e5d6273
标题：Hong Kong Interviews: Informant No. 56
日期：1980-6-9,1980-6-10,1980-6-11,1980-6-12,1980-6-13
是否是时间段：false
作者：Andrew G. Walder
来源：
标签：文章
书籍：Hong Kong Interviews: Informant No. 56
书籍作者：Andrew G. Walder

正文：
INFORMANT NO.56

PERSONALDATAAge::35

Sex:Male

University graduate (Jilin Univ., computer software)Education:Total Years Relevant Experience:

11Last Year of Relevant Experience: l978

Year Left China: 1978

LegalInitial Immigration Status:Native Place/Overseas Connections:

Indonesia OS

OSClass Background/Political Designation:

OCCUPATIONAL HISTORY SUMMARYPositions Held:  1) Dalian Sewing Machine Factory, Liaoning, l968-78

a) Worker, Stand Shop, 1968-70

b) Technician, Machine Shop, 197l-78Administratiye Level of Work Unit/(No. of employees):

1) Municipal/(2000)Experience in Full-time Manual Labor (for non-worker occupations):

worker in stand shop, 1968-70

PAGES TEXT: 15APPOINTMENTS:

TOTAL HOURS:14No. 56Occupational History

(6/9/80, 2 hrs.)

The informant is an overseas Chinese, borm in Jakarta, Indonesia.Hisfather was the headof a GeneralMotorsdivisionin Indonesia.Theinformant returned to China after lower middle school in l964 at the ageof l6.He graduated from Jilin University in Changchun in 1968, andinstead of his last year of university courses, he and his classmates weresent to the huge Changchun Automobile Factory where they spent time asworkers.Later, in l968, he was assigned to the Dalian Sewing Machinefactory in Liaoning province.1He worked in the main factory which had20oo employees, and not in one of the many subsidiary factories.1He hadstudied computer software at Jilin, but there was no work for him inthat field during the Cultural Revolution.So like all universitystudents that year, he went to do manual labor after graduation.

He workedin a shop that made stands for sewing machines out of cast iron.

He drilledholes in the iron stands so that the machine could be attached to it.Thesesewing machines were not motor driven, but pedal-powered.TThey were foruse within China, in the home.The motor-driven ones were strictiy forexport.

By l970, he had impressed the leaders with his ability to make designchanges to improve efficiency, so he was promoted to assistant technicianand was allowed to study mechanical engineering part time at an industrialcollege in Dalian.After four years hegraduated and was given a certificate,not a diploma since he was there not by examination but through relationsthat the factory had with the college.During this period he worked in themachinery maintenance shop as an assistant technician, helping the oldertechnicians oversee production and capftal equipment.This was in theoffice of the shop director.But much of this time he was in the planttechnical department doing designing work, because they didn't have thedesks and materials in the shop offices.He did this until l978 when hewas given permission to come to Hong Kong.Wages

He made 46¥ when he first graduated from college, and made that fortwo years when he was raised to 56.This was the trial period. Ithad been extended by the cultural revolution small group to two years.He remembers a talk by Jiang Qing to students of the Geological Collegewhere she discusses this decision.He made 56¥ right up until he leftin 1978.

In l972 and 1978 there were wage readjustments.(Grade l workers couldbe raised to grade 2, and grade 2 to grade 3. If you had been workingsince1964andwerestil11 grade l， or if you were working since l958 andwere still grade 2, they would raise you one grade.In 1978, they also setup year lines for raises to grades 2,3, and 4.Bonuses

They never had a bonus system in the factory while he was there. Onlysome prizes for advanced workers, and this was only after l974. Then theygave out blankets, thermos bottles, books.Before l976 they just gave outwall certificates for advanced workers.

Beginning in l974, they restored small material incentives, and reducedtheir reliance on the criticism, self-criticism method, but after a whilethe policy would change and they would criticize material incentives allover again.It went back and forth like this a couple of times.

What kind of material incentives did they start with?

They started-1-with thermos bottles blankets, transistor radios, pens.Thesewouldbegiven out at the end of the year to the best workers. Ten percent ofthe workers could be model workers.Theywouldmeet ingroups toassessworker performance, and were strictly limited to this lo% figure.

The kindof people selected had to have good relations with both coworkers and with

If you were not popular with the workers, you wouldn't getleaders.selected in the group discussion.

If you didn't get along with the groupleader, your name would not be approved when nominations lists wentup to the shop for approval.

So there were just a small number of peopleselected for these prizes, and the amount of money involved was small.

From the time he entered the plant until around 1974, they used thecriticism method and gave certificates to advanced workers. Around l974, theystarted to give these material prizes, and they would be taken away andcriticized as material incentives several times thereafter.

But they didnot restore money bonuses until after he left for Hong Kong.

He does not remember the dates very clearly, but he remembers thatin early 1975 they had these prizes, then at the end of 1975 they werediscontinued.They were restored in the end of 1976, and then taken awayduring 1977.7They criticized incentivesduring the Pi Lin Pi Kong campaign,but there were no such prizes yet given out in his plant.Theyalsocriticizedmaterial incentives during later campaigns, but he can't remember the namesof the particular campaigns very clearly.Punishments, Discipline

This is the main problem with Chinese socialism.There are really notany punishments for poor work discipline, just criticism in shop meetings.There are basically no punishments.How did China get to this point?Before l954 one wasn't: fixed to an enterprise.

The employment system1 workedjust like in Hong Kong.

Workers were employed as long as needed, gotstraight wages.Then in 1954-58, they had a bonus system.

Big bonuses thatcould be 2-3 times the size of the monthly wage.

Workers worked very hardthen.

Around l957-59 they began piece rate systems for some kinds of work.These were different ways of rewarding people for overfulfilling quotas.But during the four cleans movement this system was restricted, and during

Now they are returning to thethe cultural revolution it was abolished.1956-57method.

After the cultural revolution, systems and rules were not very clear.It was not clear who had the responsibility for carrying out things.Both responsibilities and punishments were hazy.

If a worker was absent,wages would be deducted, but outside of that it was difficult to say whatwould happen.

For example, one young worker stole a sewing machine and

Why educated? Becausetook it home.

His6punishment was to be educated.to steal was to bee a follower of revisionism and Liu Shaoqi.

After the cultural revolution workers didn't work very hard.Firings:there was a man kicked out of the plant in 1968 during the cleaning of theclass ranks by the PLA Control Committee.  He was sent to jail for beatingpeople during the Cultural Revolution.Hewasimprisoned for 2-3 years.He refers to this man as a 'smash and grabber'(da za qiang).1Anotherperson, at the end of the cultural revolution in 1969 was a worker whogot drunk and stuck his hand forcibly up a young virgin'svagina.Hewaskickedoutofthefactoryandsenttoalaborreformcamp）for3years.When he came back, the party committee had to have a meeting to let him backin the factory.But he lost his seniority and had to start at grade l again.Another worker in l972 had stolen things on the night shift, and also hadplayed around regular during work hours after finishing hissquotas.He had

-2-been accused of raping his younger sister by his own mother--and sent tolabor reform.:So he was not really kicked out for bad work, this was

He also came back to the factory after threejust part of the problem.years.Sopeopleegenerallyarenotfiredforbadwork.Basically thereis criticism, then another criticism with a recording in your file, andexpulsion is onlyythelast resort.

All of this is not to say that there iis no punishment at all.

From1969-74 they had meetingstocriticize people inn the shops and small groups.If there was a quality control problem in the group, they would meet thenext day and find out who was responsible.lIf the familybackground ofthe worker responsible was that of worker or poor peasant, then they wouldcriticize him and this would bee considered a small problem.But if yourclass background was not good, they would turn this into a struggle-criticism

They might hold an all-shop repudiation meeting where they wouldsession.all yell "down with Wang!" and you would have to confess to receiving ordersfrom your capitalist father or other relative tosabotage production andsocialism.

Notuntil1974orsodidthismethodl gradually begin to taper off.But they used it right up until l976 in Shanghai because of Chang Ch'un-ch'iao'scontrol there.

So as a result, workers and technicians were afraid to make mistakesin quality, and were afraid to do anything in violation of the orders ofthe shop leaders.They were afraid to be caught in a mistake and be criti-cized.So generally people were fairly careful about the quality of their

They had no trouble meetingg their quotas.For example, in his shopwork.during 1969-72, the quotas was 300ssewing machine heads a day. He waspersonally1 capable bf doingg 450 in an 8 hour shift, and could easily finishthe 300in6 hours.1But he wanted tooverfulfill the quota in order tobe transfered to technical work.But the average worker stayed fairlyclose to the standard quota, because to overfulfill would have required alot of hard work.

An example.There was a young worker, a middle school graduate, whojoined the factory in l972. His first year his work was good, but later,after some 3-4 years as a young worker, he tried to finish his work in 4-5hours, then would use the rest of his time to wash his clothes, do personalthingsinthefactory.Butinordertofinishearly hedidthingsagainstestablished tooling procedures and this resulted in violation of qualitystandards..Finally an older worker told him not to do it that way, because

So the young guy stopped because he knew heit was aqainst the rules.would be criticized in a meeting if the word got out.

Workers often finished their work early and did their own personal

This was the biggest problem with China's factories in the l970s,things.indeed since 1967.The discipline of workers was not as good as before1967.Before then, workersscould leave their work post for a few minutes

Afterfor a drink, and rest periods were set by law, and were short.1967, workers in his factory, when they completed a number of articlesand piled them up beside their machines, the worker would leave as longas it did not disrupt the order of work dowm the line.It was not likeelectronics production lines in Hong Kong where the speed is set by a

Whentheir piecess piled up, they could leave for a while.conveyor belt.Before the CR, workers could also leave for short periods, but they didnot want to because they had a bonus system and would be paid more themore they turned out.

What kinds of thingsdid workersdowhentheylefttheirworkposts?They would wash their clothes with factory soap0 and water, would go findanother friend in another shop and talk for 30 minutes to an hour.AAlsOthey would go to the collective showers in the factory, clean up, go to

-3-the toilet (they don't have these kind of facilities in most factoryhousing or in housing outside either).  So they would get their clothes,themselves all cleaned up, so that when the shift was over they couldgo directly home.

Women also would visit the clinics regularly complaining of cramps,monthly sickness, or to go nurse their babies at the nursing stations.Workers did not playcards6 or chess during work time, this was strictlyforbidden.Also, workers would take stainless steel material from plantstocks (stainless6 steel is very scarce in China), and would make pots,pans, knives, and would take them home.IBut they didn't do this when thestaff or leaders were around.

WorkersinChinacould not subscribe to Reference News like the infor-mant could, but they would get ahold of copies and read about foreigncountries.They oftenfelt that factory work in America was too fast-paced, and that life in their factories wasn't very comfortable.Butthey felt they were fortunate in China's factories, where life could beso comfortablefrom1 the viewpoint of work pace.

Also workers in his factory, and also technicians and cadres, wouldtake personal leavee to buy difficult to get articles, like vegetables andpork oil, which are just not enough according to rations.So they wouldoften get in line, buy a sewing machine, then take a boat over to Shandong

There they would have relatives orfromDalian--eitherYantaiorQingdao.friends who needed sewing machines, but who had a lot of oil to trade.These kinds of agricultural by-products were more abundant in Shandong.becauseofamoreliberalagricultural policy in the communes toward side-

Liaoning was very radical at that time, it waslines: and private plots.under Mao Yuanxin.They did not have policies where peasants could sellpigs and foodstuffs from their private plots to the collective.SSosuppliesof these agricultural products was very tight in the cities.

Postscript on punishments and discipline:In a later interview,theinformant says he is concerned that I received a mistaken iimpression iinour earlier discussion on punishments.1Management of workerss in China isnot primarily the use of punishment.It is the use of 'enemies'.Forexample, in his first 2 years in thee plant, when he was a worker in the shop.they would commonly have meetings6 in the shop where the shop leader would

"Recently, there have been many people in thisshopwhogive a speech:

This reflectshave been very little concerned about production and quality.the influence of the class enemies!"

This was common.He says that atthis time he was just out of college, and didn't understand the country andits politics very well yet, so one time he raised his hand in a (group meetingand said that if you always use this people-enemy contradiction in talkingto the people, you'll never get anywhere. At that point the shop leaderpulled out the little red book of Lin Biao's quotations and read a quotethat went something like this:"politics is6 nothing more than class struggle".At this point he sensed he would be the object of 'class struggle' if hepersisted, so he didn't speak out at meetings anymore.

The point he tried to make when he spoke out in this instande was thatthe reason why people weren't paying attention to quality was that manyof the workers were women, they had families to take care of, and withall the meetings after work everyday they couldn't takee care of all thefamily chores.It hadnothingg to do with class struggle at all.Sowork discipline does not rely on systems of punishment.

It relies on

Exactly like what is going on in Iran today.the use of 'enemies'.

How did thisS make people feel?He personallyfelt sympathyfor thesewomen when they were beinglectured to aabout class enemies by the shopleader just because they were chatting during the meeting.

This method4is called "pointing to the mulberry and cursing the willow" by Chinesepeople.When he spoke up in this particular case, it was in one woman'sdefense.The group leader then turned on him, and other workers in thegroup, including the woman worker he had defended, turned on him andcriticized him, reading a few quotations from Lin Biao at him.So hewas criticized a bit.Later，aan old experienced woman worker came up tohim and said, "Look, you just got out of college and came out into society.You don't yet understand things.It would be better for you just to talkless and work more, say the things you have to say and be done with it".You can imagine how I felt.This is what is meant by the common sayingin China, "Liars can move up in the world" (shuo jiahua de ren neng shangqu),or more appropriately, "those who can sing a high-pitched melody can risein the world"(neng shuo diaoze gao de ren neng shangqu).The wholething is a performance.  You learn very quickly to make these performancesand not say what you really feel.The "loyalty to Mao dance" is justanother example of this kind of performance.Biaoxian is an importantword, it means to 'show', and depends not on what you think or feel, buton what you show to others.

It became like cheating when the PLA representatives came.Theyinstantly stood up, became very polite, yelled a few slogans from Mao orLin Biao, and then danced the "loyaltytoMaodance".It was a show justfor the PLA representatives. Far from people's feelings, it was almostlike cheating these PLA cadres.1But it reflected well on the group leader,who knew how tosinga lofty tune andget ahead.

This type of activity tapered off after the Lin Biao affair, and itwas used less often.No more "loyalty to Mao dances" after Lin Biaodied.Now in China intellectuals refer to the Gang of Four policy as

Workers didn'tone of "keeping the people in ignorance" (yumin zhengce).like these kinds of things, especially the 'loyaltyto Mao dance'，buttheydidn't dare resist.Whether or not they dared to resist depended onthe political atmosphere in different units.sSome units you don't dare,in others, like some universities, they made a big joke of the whole thingand had to give it up.Temporary andContract Labor(6/10/80, 3 hrs.)

There were many of these kinds of workers.Temporary workers who hadworked in the factory since l967 were all changed to permanent grade 1workers in l972. But they continued to hire new temporary workers afterthat time, and those who had entered after l967 were still temporaries.But they restricted the number of temporary workers newly hired after l972.After that the temporaries were people from the families of peopleconnected with the unit.But a large portion of these were from the familiesof cadres who used connections to get their children back from the countrysideand into the city, or to get their wives a job.

Almost all temporary workers in their plant were women.Theworkwasbasically the same as regular workers, just that the skill level was lower.Many had formerly been housewives.The vast majority of female workersamong thetemporaries is evidence that they had been hired from the familiesof employees for quite some time.During the period he worked there hesaw very few male temporary workers.Structure of the Sewing Machine Factory

His plant was thee main plant (zongchang)， state-owned.There was abranch factory. collectively1 owned, which also had about looo employees,which did their iron castingI for them.This was 'da jiti' (large collective),which meant it got plans from the state, its leaders were assigned by the

-5-bureau.They are under the bureau, and have sales and supply departmentsjust like a regular factory.

The small collectives6(xiao jiti）arethesmaller collectives and are under street committees, and are calledstreet factories.When1 the informant left China, he heard that they weregoing to make a company in the city to coordinate all the activities ofthe general plant, branch plant and the street collectives which producedsewing machine components.

The leading group of the factory:

When he first came to the plant in1969, they had already formed a revolutionary committee. There were threePLA representatives on that committee.The head of the RC was a PLA man,and so was one vice-head and one regular member.In l973, the third one,the regular member,was sent back to his military unit. The other twoleft after the fall of the Gang of Four in l977.At that time the militaryofficer had been head of the RC for lo years.

Thereweretwovice-headsofthecommitteewhowerecadres.Therewere l0-l3 people on the committee in all.The first head was the PLArepresentative, and was the lst ranking vice-head.One of theothervice-heads was an old cadre, the former vice-director of the plant, and thesecond vice-head was a director of a printing plant in the city andwas transfered to their plant in late 1968 or early 1969.There was a grade6 old worker, an ordinary worker, who had been a leader of one of the mass

The head of the partyorganization1 (or personnel)factions in the plant.department was a regular member of the RC and a representative of the

He was a worker before he was promoted to this position daringcadres.the CR.This man was a cadre as far as his current position went, buthe actually was a worker in terms of his official salary scale and hisorganizational designation.There were a lot of workerswho were putinto staff and leadership positions to take the place of cadres of bad

This wasclass background who had been sent to be workers iin the shops.the policy of using workers to take the place of cadres (yi gong dai gan).

There were about 200cadresThere werea lot of suchcadressinthe plant.in the plant, about half of them were workers takingI cadre positions.Most were party members or demobilized soldiers.

The number of cadres increased greatly in l973 as the Party's cadrepolicy was implemented. The old cadres came back but the workers takingcadres places, who were considered more reliable by the plant leadership(especiallyy the demobilized solaiers), were not sent back dowm to the shops.

Many of these cadres attacked duringSo the number of cadres increased.the CR had been sent to rural villages in Liaoning to do manual labor.

Not

They gradually returned--aboutMay 7 Cadre Schools--to ordinary villages.

After the cultural revolution, however,80% of them--during this period.almostalltheleading cadres of the departments had to be Party members.

He doesn't remember very(clearly the precise membership of the revolu-tionary committee.The mass representatives6 were changed every one or twoyeasr, and the representation was not fixed,andtherewerenorulesaboutwho representatives should be.Therewas noset procedureforselectingrepresentatives.But the masses didn't elect them--these wereinternal partyselections, not mass elections. All the members of the RC had to be partymembers.There was a mass representative on the RC right after the culturalrevolution who was a faction leader but not a party member.He was removedafter a couple of years.Thereafter every once in a while they would havesecret ballot elections for l5 or so members of the RC, and thePLAheadwould draw up a name list of about l7 people.SSo his people would always

These elections are not important.They are just a formality.be selected.

Power in the factory was really held by the military.

The cadre repre--6-sentatives on the RC didn't have much power.There was no real fixeddivision of labor as far as he knew among the RC members.They justdid things according to the PLA head's orders.

The finally re-established a party committee around l974-75, he doesnot remember the date clearly. because he wasn't a party member.Butthenew Party secretary was the PLA head of the revolutionary committee.Butbefore the re-establishment of the Party Committee, they had a partyleadershipcorecalledthe partysmall group (dang xiaozu).At thetime they formally re-established the party committee they also revivedthe structure below of the party branches.

When the PLA left in l977 or sothe highest ranking cadres moved upand took their place.When he left there was no longer a revolutionarycommittee, only a partycommittee.They brought in cadres from otherfactories6 to become plant directors and party secretaries after therevolutionary committee was abolished. As he remembers it, they abolishedthe RC a few months before the PLA left.For a short period, no plantdirector or vice-director existed in the plant.They did not appointa new plant director and vice-director like before the cultural revolutionuntil after a period of almost a year when the party committee was runningthe plant。Then around May-June l978 they re-appointed new directors.But you must remember that the revolutionary committee heads and partycommittee first secretaries never ran production, but the production officesdid.So these changes did not affect day to day operations very much.

The one cadre who was transfered in during l969 from the printing plant(their former plant director)was transferedout in l974 or sobecause ofirregular relations with young pretty female workers in the shop.Hewaswell knowm for trading advantages6for sexual favors, and was looked dowmon and had to be transfered out.Staff Organizationand Changes

(6/11/80, 3 hrs.)

There were three major periods into which he breaks down the adminis-trative organization of the factory:1) 1969-72, 2) 1973-78, 3) and thechanges, largely at the level of the top leadership, in the few monthsbefore he left in l978.

His first few years in the plant, 1969-72, the revolutionary committeeled a plant headquarters (changbu), which was divided into three groups.The personnel group (zu), production group, and political work group(zhenggong zu)..The political work group) led a security group）(baowei zu)and a people's militia (minbing).1During this period none of the universityeducation technical cadres were allowed to work full time in the staffoffices.The "proletariat occupied the superstructure"--that was the policy.So they had workers promoted to work in these staff positions.Thesewereoften workers with experience and high technical skills.They would keepthe middle school level technicians--the draftsmen and design copiers, sincethey could almost be considered workers.SSomeoftheworkersnewly appointedto staff positions were faction leaders during the cultural revolution, butnot all of them were.Some were simply experienced workers with high tech-nical skill who had already done leadership work before.Most of thesepeople were party members--all the ones put in leadership positions wereparty members.

This was the policy that Kang Sheng called "simplifying administrativestructures", a policy he got from one of Mao's quotations.Almostallofthe old staff workers--all the university graduates, that is--were sent todo manual labor, and a large number of them were sent not to the shopsbut to agricultural villages.Some of them, like the informant, would be

-7-allowed to do some designing work in the offices， but when they werefinished they would have to return to the shops.

They not only reduced the total number of people working in theoffices--originally there was a staff of 2o0, whereas after the reductionthere was only 40-50.They also reduced the number of staff departments.The former technical department was gutted.

Two people were sent to theshops for labor, another 20 were sent to agricultural villages.AAt firstthey were not sent to May 7 Cadre Schools, but later they were put intothem.They were sent down because of their bad class backgrounds.Onlyone woman was left behind in the office--a draftsman with technical schooleducation.

The effect of this was to prevent new technical improvements in designandproductionmethods.They could only， at best, turn out larger numbersot the old designs.For example, the older experienced workers knew howto produce articles according to techniaal diagrams, and knew that certaintolerances were required when doing the tooling, but they did not knowthe theory behind the design,they did not know why it had to be set at.0oool cm instead of .0oolcm.

Sothe result was that they could not improvethe product design.and create new products.They could just continuo toturn out the old ones.

In other words, the new people in the technical staff positions couldlead production but in a limited way.

The head of the production group(shengchan zu)was an old experienced worker, had profound experience insewing machine building.FBut if a problem with quality came up, he wouldknow immediately which part of the machine was off, and in which shop itwas produced, where the problem was.The remedy was just that the technicaldiagrams were not being followed correctly.He knew that diagrams had tobe followed, and regulated tolerances observed, but he did not know why,nor could he do designing work himself.

So in all they reduced the number of staff people, reduced the numberof offices, and staffed the offices with non-intellectuals. Of course,later Chou Enlai wanted to bring the intellectuals back to the offices to

But this was the policy--the PLA representatives did not like thiswork.policy.They thought they had already cleaned the class ranks and simpli-fied administration.

Now why make them dirty and complex once again?

Sothe rehabilitation of cadres and intellectuals was very gradual.Theydragged their feet.Even when he left in l978 there were still 5-6 cadresstill in the villages.There was a conflict over rehabilitation. Theissue was6 "how do you evaluate the past l7 years?".

Office of the Chief Engineer:

Beforel966 they hadan office of thechief engineer (gongcheng shi bangong shi).They abolished it at the begin-

The head of the technical department,ning of the cultural revolution.a communist with a working class background, had led all the technicians

Iftherewasanewpieceofequipmenttobeinthetechnicaldepartment.desigmed, the director orderee the plant engineer and the technical depart-

The engineerment head to organize technicians to design thee equipment.has to approve the plans (in their plant he was not called the generalengineer or chief engineer because they only had one engineer).Thisman was Cantonese, and had a brother who was an engineer with Pan Am inthe US. He had worked in a militarY plant in Dalian until the Four Cleansmovement in l963 when he was transfered to tthis plant because of his

They did not want him workingin a defense-relatedoverseas relations.plant.But this man had an elder brother in Canton who was a Party member,and he was not attacked down there because in the South1 things are moreopen and it is more common to have overseas relations.

-8-During the cultural revolution, they abolished the engineer's office

How did they struggle him?  Theyandcriticizedandstruggledthisman.took him, a mechanical engineer, to a large meeting and asked him torepair a Swedish-made automatic jig boring machine which had broken down.He said he couldn't do it without an investigation to see what was wrong.Then they started to criticize him, and asked a skilled worker to fix itand he did.sSo theysaid the engineer was not really qualified, and that theworking class was in fact the most talented and smartest class.

Then the man wrote a self-examination, and people put up wall postersabout him all over the factory.

This criticism was initially organized bythe Party Committee, which was trying to show that it was in fact revolu-tionary，but later the partyIcommitteeitslefhadthespearheadofstrugglepointed at them, and the criticism of the engineer subsided as rebelswent after party leaders.  jLater this man went to become a regular worker,and after a couple of years, when they re-established the technicaldepartment, he became a staff technician in the department.

This was typicalof the trendof thought at the time.The old super-structure of organization was destroyed because it was considered bourgeois,and the working class was to occupy it.They also abolished the qualitycontrol department in 1966, and did not restore it until 1973. During1972-74 they met their output quotas,but only 40% of theproducts werefirst-class quality goods(more on this later).The office of the engineerwasnotrestoredin1the factory until after he left,in 1979.

(6/12/80, 3 hrs.)ShopManagementandChanges

The three groups under the factory headquarters led the shops directly.The shops were led by a shop revolutionary coimmittee.The head of theshop, a statistician,aand the head of the party smail group formed theleading body.AAll three of these peoplee were full-time office personnel.There were also some mass representatives, who all had to be party members.Each shop had production groups under it, and also a machinery repair

There was also an electrical power shop (dongli chejian),group）(jixiu zu).which handled all electrical systems and also all 1machinery repair and

The plan- hadbuilding, and also a tool shop, which made cutting tools.to make all their equipment and cutting tools becuase they just couldn'tbuy these things.

They were too scarce.And also they didn't have enoughcurrency in China to buy them overseas. sSo the repair shops, equipmentshops, and tool shops were very important.

In his first 2 years in the factory, the informant worked in a productiongroup in the #2 workshop, which had 2o0 workers in all.The shop was brokendown into 3 production groups and a machinery repair group..The threeproduction groups were a sewing machine head group）(jitou zu)，a spraypainting group, and the sewing machine stand group.The machine repairgroup did repairs on the shop'ssequipment and madesimpleequipmentthatdid not require helpfrom the electrical power shop.The informant workedin the sewing machine stand group, which had 5o workers in all.

(xiaozu)ofabout25

The stand (group was divided into two groupsworkers each, but the number of people increased greatly at the end ofthe year, because 5o people were just not enough.

The reason for this fluctuation in labor demand

Production Rhythms:was that the qualityof the irontheycasted was only uptostandardabout 50% of the time.Sotheyhadtoremelt much of it and add cokingcoal once again, which meant that they ran out of cokingcoalneartheend of the year and had to use some of the next year's quota, and also thismeant that because of the high rejection rate for the pig iron, which was

~9-produced in a branch plant, a large collective, it was difficult to completemonthly quotas early in the year.sSoat theendoftheyeartheyhavetwo ways to get enough coal for coking--by exchanging materials withother plants through the back door, or by 'borrowing'((jieyong） from anotherplant the needed materials with the understanding that they would bereturned at the beginning of the next year.

This in turn is one factoryin continuing poor quality--they don't add enough coke.So this was avicious cycle.

There are other factors involved.

The first quarter is used for majoroverhauls of the plant machinery which may have been neglected in the laterquarters during the previous year.  Also there are about 7 days vacationin February for New Year.Before the cultural revolution if you did notmeet your quotasevery month, you would be in trouble with the bureau.

Seevery month, you would be in trouble with the bureau.But for lo years after the CR, it was no problem to do this.sSo therhythm-like nature of production became more pronounced after the culturalrevolution.

For example, when he was working in the Changchun #l Auto Factory inl968, an old worker told him that before the CR if the assembly line inthat plant broke down for over 7 minutes， the incident had to be reported

The state controlled production very tightly beforeto the State Council.the cultural revolution--both quantity and quality.But afterwardsthey

Thedidn't, so production fluctuated by the month and quality went down.PLA deputyin hisfactorytold him inl972 that the Vietnameseaskedfor military trucks as war aid, but did not want any of those manufacturedsince the beginning of the CR.

So at the beginning of the year the problem is largely that of material,but bythe middleof the year the problem became worker activism.Workersgenerally were not satisfied with their wages so they took to purposeful

The leadersslowdowms in order to get overtime and increase their income.knew what was going on and couldn't do anything, because almost all theworkers were doing it and they always had an excuse when confronted.This

So they wouldproblem is especially serious in the assembly workshops.make 200 pieces from 7am to. 1lam,2200 from 1-5pm, and then 400 from 5-7pm.So the quality of the last group，(of course， was not as good.The quota inthis case was around looo pieces a day.Soat theend of each yearthey added a lot of workers.Some were temporary workers, but they alsomobilized teachers and students from middle schools as part of their 'labortempering', to comeetothe plant and pitch in at theendof the year.Theymade about 30 a day.This 3oc was not a wage, it was a supplement to allowthem to buy lunch in the factory.This was considered 'service work'(yewu gongzuo). They were able to increase production not by adding thesepeople to the day shift--there were not enough machines.  So as the yearwent on and they added these temporary workers to a second shift, and sometimesthey even created a third shift in order to complete the plan by the end ofthe year.If by some chance the plant finished the plan a month or severalweeks early. the bureau would just add to the quota, so the situation wouldbe the same.

His small group had about 25 workers, butSmall Group Management:

They had a group leader.He led meetings in thefluctuated seasonally.group, attended meetings at the shop level, arranged production in the groupand made daily reports of production statistics on the situation in thegroup--specifically progress toward plan completion.  TThe leader of thesmall group is not necessarily a party1 member, but the leader of the'large group' (dazu--in this case the sewingg machine stand group of 50people) always is.These group leaders were excellent workers, and often

-10-weremodelworkers.They worked hard.'They came in early and left late,and oversaw everything in the group.These group leaders are crucial.Without them, production would be very hard to arrange.These group leadersparticipated in production , had their own manual work to do, but didleave their production posts if there was a meeting.

The large group(dazu)is roughlyequivalent toa section(gongduan）iin other factories.These groupleaders wereoftenselected modelworkers for prizes at theend of the year.

Naturally these groupleaders have to be very energetic,and they have to handle both production posts better and faster than mostworkers and also other tasks.

So when they get old and their health andenergyssubsides, they are transfered to other work.This happens oftenbecause these leaders are usually veteran workers before being appointedin the first place.

The group leaders in China are different from those in Hong Kong.

InJapanesefirms6 in Hong KongJ (the informant has worked in the Citizen'sWatch Factory here). they had group leaders (zuzhang))whooversaw about50 workers, but generally didn't take part in manual labor unless someonewas absent and it was necessary.

There are no group leaders in theAmerican-run factories he has worked in here (he was laid off last weekby an American electronics firm).:Instead, they havee'production supervisors'who oversee 50-70 workers.They do not participate in productive labor.So in China groupleaders areregular workers and the number of workersthey supervise is smaller.

The vice-group leader in his Dalian factory basically helps the

If the small group has workerssintwodifferentroomsgroup leader.they will be sure to put a vice-leader in the second room.They hadworkers appointed to do management tasks, but the names changed dependingon political trends.Sometimestheycalledthesystemn'ba da yuan'(eight

Sometimespersonnel), and sometimes:'wu da yuan'(five personnel).theycalledthem'red soldiers' (hong xiaobing).During the period beforeLin Biao fell they used this last name, a military one, as they did inother parts of theeplant--all names and organizations were militarizedduring these few years.Shops were called lian(company),.and the shopdirector a 'company commander'(lianzhang).

They renamed the structure

This practice was discontinued after theaccording to military usages.fallof LinBiao.But during this period it was not only the namesthatwerechanged.They had military-like calisthentics before each

They also had to have dailyshift, and after the shift, every day.meefings to study Mao's sayings and have criticism-self criticism sessions.Sometimes they had mass meetings after the shift, but this was not fordiscussion purposes, but for the purpose of listening to reports by therevolutionary committee on politics, production situation, and to readimportant new documents.

Duringg the 1969-72 period, the people who were appointedi 'red soldiers'rotated daily.

Anyone who worked in the group except those who had

be a 'red soldier'problems of a politi cal or historical nature could

ForTheirjobwastohelpthe group leader toarrange the day's work.example, they will be responsible for keepingtheworkshopfloorcleanand swept, and will be responsible for taking notes at meetings.

Someonewould be responsible for sending bag lunches out to be heated up. or toget hot water for drinking and bring it to the shop.No one is especiallyassigned to these types of tasks, like the various custodians and helpersin Hong Kong factories.Workers do all of these thingss in Chinese factories,

After the collapse of Lin Biaoin addition to their daily production work.they changed the names of these people to 'dayuan'(personnel), but as faras he was aware they still used a rotating system, no fixed person.

-11-

In l969 to late l97l, there were ro quality inspectors at all in theshop.

They had already abolished the quality control department in1967.

From that time until late l97l there were no quality inspectors.Later，iin early l972, right after Lin Biao fell, they establishedquality inspectors in each small group, under the leadership of the

But this was much different than when they had a quality controlshop.department, because these quality inspectors, workers, were under theleadership of the shop directors, who wanted to meet output targets.So they ended up saying OK when they should not have.There were cross-pressures. ?This is part of what he means when he says that in a largesense, there were no great production problems, but in a more detailedsense, there were many serious and complex problems.  Another problemwithqualityis that the military deputy decided that the second coatof spray paint on the sewing machine stand was unnecessary, Sothis led to a drop in^quality also.

Meetings:During 1969-72, they had six days of political study per week,whereas before the CR it was two times a week for one hour each dayafter the shift.But often there was nothing to study before the culturalrevolution and workers would just go home. So the rules was twice a weekbut in practice it was often just once or none at all.

During 1973-76 they went back to two times.a week,.one hour after theshift.During 1977-78, when production was very busy. tthey often wentthree full weeks without political study meetings.

They might increasethe number for political campaigns, but rarely.In the campaigns afterthe fall of Lin Biao, they did not have criticism meetingsStoattackpeople on political matters.These post-Lin campaigns did not have struggle

But there were criticism meetings of people who broke laws,targets.andstolee things from other workers.

Also,, to append the earlier discussion about Communists in leadingpositions in1 the group--very often the lathe workers in the shops were

Somostly young workers, and there were few party members among them.

Theywere allthey would put youth league members in their place.activists.Out of a shop of 2o0, only about 5o were youth league members.

(6/13/80, 3 hrs.)Staff Management,Changes 1972-77

One by one, they re-established the staff departments.This was veryshortly after the cadres were returned from the villages and the shops.Theyreceivedadocument fromabovetellingthemtore-establishstaffdepartments.When they re-established them, they made sure the leaderswere party members of worker background.Some of them were former rebel

The old cadres would usually be regularleaders or activists, but not all.staff members, sometimessvicedepartmentheads.Also, they still hadformer workers working in the staff (yigong dai gan).

The head of the quality control department was the pre-CR departmenthead. He was a communist, had a worker background, and had poor peasantfamily origins, so he had stayed on in the factory and headed the newQC department when it was re-established.  The head of the sales and supplydepartment was the same story. and also the technical department and tooldepartment.The head of the production department was a man who was askilled worker, party1member，aand a member of a rebel organization.Thesame was true of the new head of the security department head, exceptthat he originally was a demobilized soldier before the CR.

The cadre department head was a demobilized PLA captain who had enteredthe plant in 1968.The leader of the electrical power department (dongli ke)was a former PLA company commander who had entered the plant in l968.Hewas around 38-40 at the time, a demobilized soldier.The head of the party

-12-committee office was a student just graduated from Peking University.His father had joined the PLA in l939, and at the time was the head ofPeking's Railway Bureau.

The militarydeputy leading the plant appointed all of these people.It is clear that he wanted to curry favor with the high official inPeking whose son he appointed to head the party office.

The union was also re-established during this period, and its job wasto help）the RC run political study.They had criticized the former unionfor being overlyIconcerned with worker's welfare, so this time the unionwas purely political.There was a party branch for all of these organscalled the :jiguan zhibu.Quality InspectionDepartment

There was no quality inspection department (jiancha ke) from l969-72,just quality inspectors (jiancha yuan) under the shop director.The depart-ment was finally re-established around 1973.The members came from theexperienced workers in the shops.

There was no technicians in it.Theycarriedout work according to the formerC quality standards.The departmentmanaged the measuring instruments.TheyYmadesuretheywereaccuratandif they were not, they repaired them.

Thee inspectors in the shops, the experienced workers from the largegroup, were under the leadership）of the quality iinspection department, andtheir only work was to inspect.1But they did not come from the group.They pulled out selected lots of parts for inspection.1Even though theyhad these inspections, their methods were still left-wing.  For example,they decided it was only necessary to paint the sewing machine stands once,and not twice.as they had always done before the CR.  The stand would onlybe painted twice on special orders from above if a lot was to be exported

Also the packaging is differentto Africa, Southeast Asia, or Albania.for externally and internallyI marketed goods.

They sorted goods6 into 3 grades--lst, 2nd, and substandard (fupin).They were sorted into one group or another based on the amount of tolerancein machine heads and pins, and also on theequality of the stand andthepaint job.First grade goods were sold to provincial and national commercialbureaus (shangye ju), although the national market was more interested inShanghai goods.The second grade goods were sold to the local municipalco-mercial departments, and the third grade goods weren't even packaged.Part of them were held on to by the leadership for going through the.backdoor or to give to friends or connections in other units.The rest wereoffered to the workers in the plant for sale, but the numbers rarely metthe demand, so tthese substandard goods were offered to workers on arotating basis, by giving out ration tickets.

Before the CR, only grade l goods were counted toward plant planfulfillments.After the CR, grade 2 goods were also counted.The sellingprices for grade l goods was l50￥, for grade 2 l20¥, and for substandardgoods 99¥. But the costs naturally were the same for each (usually around96¥). So the higher the quality, the higher the profit. But the Northeastwas knowm for producing sewing machines at high1 cost, but with low quality.In this respect Shanghai was considered superior.

The informant traveled to Shanghai several times to study their qualitysystems.He found that they had more old, skilled workers on the frontlines of production there, doing crucial machining work on the lathes.But in Dalian they had all young workers doing these jobs, while theexperienced workers went to theerepairdepartments.When there was norepair work they didn't go helpo out in production like in Hong Kong， they just

-13-sat, talked and rested.

So an important problem with quality during this period was the qualityof the young workers.Many had graduated from 1968-70, when they hadn'tlearned things well, their cultural level was low, and many were unhappyto be working only in a factory.So they worked hard only to get ingood with leaders and get out of production line work to a staff or arepair department job.Factions

Factions during this l972-77 period depended wholly on personal relations,and were not out in the open.It just depended on whether or not peoplegot along on an individual basis.

Remember that some of the old cadresdidn't get along with each other, and young people also didn't get alongwith one another sometimes. So the relations were very complex.

Theyhave exactly the same kind of factionalism in Hong Kong factories.ChangesaftertheGang_of Four

Even after Lin Biao fell, it was still "politics leads everything",The function of the party committee was veryiimportant.1Nobodywouldare say that the plant director should1ead things.Around 1977 or 1978they abolished the RC, and transfered in a new plant director.Also anew party secretary was transfered in.The top three: leaders in theplant were criticized after the Gang of Four fell in wallposters because oftheir activities in the plant.This included two military (deputies andtwo other top cadres in the plant (old cadres).They were soon transferedout.The criticisms of these military deputies had to do with their seizingof privileges, their use of the back door for their relatives, their connec-tions with military leaders grouped around Mao Yuanxin.They said that thesekinds of back-door dealingss were suppressing the worker's initiative.

But when the top military deputy left, they were' still maintaining thestatus quo as far as the leaders of the departments went.They only personthey removed was the department head of the personnel department, who hadgood relations with the military deputy.

the followers of the Gang of Four,

The bureau called a meeting to uncoverandallLthe department heads went to this meeting to denounce their formerleaders and the one personnel department head who was removed.  As the peoplein the plant used to say--"They really did some scrambling", they weretrying to save themselves.  So these people who had nothing but praise forthe former military deputy earlier now heaped abuse on him at the meeting.The people in the plant, however, knew that all the leaders were just thesameeasthe onesdenounced for following the Gang of Four.

They only studied documents in their groups about the Gang of Four.There were no people in the plant criticized in the meetings for followingthe Gang of Four.Their shop director didn't say anything more aboutthe old military deputy because he was a party member and the goings-onof the bureau meeting were not for outside ears.These conditions wereabout the same throughout Dalian, according to what he picked up from hisfriends.

One striking change was the attitude towards intellectuals, towardtechnicians.Before they had looked down on:intellectuals except whenthey came from a military background, and it was hard to enter the party.At that time they formally reversed the verdicts on all the people who hadbeen attacked and left hanging.In some cases they promoted these peopleto better jobs.But they had not yet demoted the workers who had risenup to be staff members. He hears that now China is beginning to face up

-14-to handling this problem. But when he was there they were still maintainingthe status quo. This reversal of verdicts on intellectuals and old cadresaffected also their relatives, and their ability to get good assignments,get accepted into the youth league and universities.

So basically there were no striking changes in the factory.?Theymain-tained the status quo. Production improved only gradually.  He only hearsrecently from friends that it was not until mid-l979 that worker and cadreinitiative was really aroused, as a result of the bonus policy.

Elections for cadres?  (The informant laughs) No! Definitely notfor shop directors.  These leading cadres are all appointed. They didhave long discussions in small groups to select group leaders, but hedoesn't know much about that. It was not by show of hands or ballots.They discuss democratically， then the person is appointed by the aboveleadership after a report is written and sent to them summarizing thegroup discussion. This is what is known as the method of democraticcentralism。

-15一

描述：

