id: 4c4522be7e
标题：Hong Kong Interviews: Informant No. 139
日期：1990-5-24,1990-5-28,1990-5-30,1990-6-7,1990-6-14,1990-6-20,1990-6-27,1990-7-2,1990-7-11
是否是时间段：false
作者：Andrew G. Walder
来源：
标签：文章
书籍：Hong Kong Interviews: Informant No. 139
书籍作者：Andrew G. Walder

正文：
No. 139

(Cambridge)No.139Background（5/24/90,3hrs.)

The informant attended Xuancheng Middle School,in Anhui province.At thattime the town was a county seat. The school had about 900-1o00 students,combinedjunior and senior levels.The town had about 100,000 people in 1966.

His father died in 1959, had suffered an injury in a fall while working for alandlord before revolution,and his health was bad thereafter.After 1949 he became aveterinarian in the countryside.He had a bad heart,and while doingmanual labor on awork team he died of a heart attack. Our family had no money, my mom almostcommitted suicide in the hope that Iwould be adoptedby a familybetter able to provideforme.1Mother eventually remarried an electrical worker in 1963.We were still poorbecause my stepfather had already had 3 kids by a previous marriage.Often had nofood in the house,so after I went away to school I didn't feel like coming home verymuch.

Had finished the second year of junior high,was 13 years old in 1966.This wasthe top school in Anhui province. A long history going back to the 1890s, started bymissionaries. Excellent record on the college entrance examinations.Over 90 percentwere getting into college on the national exams in the late 1950s. One of the bestmiddle schools in the country by that standard. Our principal met with Lu Dingyi,Minister of Education during that time. Very strong sense of elitism in the school. Ifyour child got into junior high school there,you could be assured of getting into thesenior section, for the most part, and if you graduated from the senior section,you hadan excellentchance togo on to college.

I had poor peasant chushen,it went back 3 generations. My father, aunt, andgrandfather had all been beggars for a period of time, and grandparents were so poorand uneducated they didn't even have proper names.I know this because before I wentto the Institute of Marxism,Leninism,Mao Zedong Thought in 1982,Fudan Universitydid a verythoroughbackground check on me,and found that my grandfather was calledDing Laocu (old roughDing),and my grandmother was Pan Yatou (servant or slavePan). This class background gave me a real boost in school admissions that year,probably would not have gotten into this school otherwise.

Before the CR,I was a good student academically but bad in terms in disciplineand conformity.Ha been a dsciplinary problem beginning in grade school.Received a"serious warning”once (this is one step short of suspension,which is in turn one stepshort of expulsion,the most serious punishment).Fought with other students,made funof activist student leaders,formed a clique with the other bad students.

About June or July 1966,I was formally denounced in public by my classcounselor for being arrogant and self-important. Said I looked down upon teachers, readprohibited materials. Still,got straight A's in the required classes,but was continuallywarned and punished by the teachers.Still,a few months before this,the teachersnominated me to the student council （xueshenghui),even though junior school studentswere rarely nominated. I guess the class counselor nominated me because of myacademic record.Some of the members from the senior school were already candidatemembers of the party.This was considered a great honor.

Only about 7 percent of the students in the junior school were in the youthleague,and only about 10 percent of the senior school. They were very selective.Students generally had good class background and high scores on tests in the key point

No.139

2schools. So they didn't have much interest in politics, not much activism.We had verylittle political education, study, manual work. Basically, if you are obedient to theteachers,your politics were good.Everyone was most concerned with college entranceexaminations.

Our school was so elite, our teacher said we should take Einstein (boys) andMarie Curie (girls) as our models. A very intense, very academic place.They told usour goal should be not just to get into college, but to get into Beijing, Qinghua, or FudanUniversities. Of course, during the CR this was criticized as the white expert road.

In the big cities,many of the students in keypoint schools were children of highercadres or leading intellectuals.Most of us in the county school came from ordinaryfamilies.This probably is why academic performance was stressed so much.Beginnings of the Cultural Revolution

The CR came to us via the newspapers. Late spring 1966. All our finals wereover, all assignments had been made for the next year and the college exams were over,fees paid for next term and the textbooks for the fall had already arrived.

Thebig loudspeakers at the schools saidplease pay attention to the followingimportant article from Renmin Ribao.It was about old ideas, old values, bourgeoiseacademic authorities.It was June,already quite warm.Weweren'tsurprisedbythis.It was common to have some kind of political campaign going on. The 4 cleans had notyet formally been concluded there.We though it was just part of a new stage of the 4cleans.

They cancelled summer vacation to have us stay at school and concentrate onpolitical study.I was happy I didn't have to go home to do manual work. When the CRbegan I could now stay in the dormitory, unlike before (if you lived too close to school,like I did, you couldn't stay there, at least until the regulations were all abolishedmonths later). Students were mostly not active in the CR, but I became very active. Inthe beginning, no differences among students in their involvement. Just sat around,readarticles,discussed,biaotai

Around August and September, then things began to change. By Septembershould have begun the fall term,but the party documents said ordinary classes werecancelled, still in the process of the CR and political study. This disappointed manystudents,especially seniors anxious about preparations for the college exams.In lateSeptember or maybe early October, students were organized to go to a village around 14kilometers away to help peasants do the harvest,read newspaper articles to the peasants.We worked there about 4 weeks,then back to the school.

After we returned, we got ahold of leaflets from Beijing and Shanghai discussingthe Red Guard movement.We didn't get them through school authorities,they cameback with travellers, through the mail. Then we began to learn what was going on inBeijing and Shanghai.School authorities developed a very full program of activities forus not to become Red Guards.Sent us to the mountain districts 40 km away to workon-river bank shoring..Tried to isolate us; there was no radio, no mail, no papers.Thiswas even more remote than the village.

The school appointed the potential troublemakers,like me, to be heads of brigadeson the riverbank conservation project.I was appointed head at this time;they figured ifI didn't give them trouble then no one would.In this period I was pretty well behavedand I didn't do anything wrong, didn't want to run off.

Beginning about the 3rd week there, trucks came from other cities to bring other

No.139

3students from other schools and also equipment and materials.The drivers broughtalong newspapers, handbills, news by mouth. We heard about other students travellingon revolutionary linkups,and the truck drivers said "why do you kids stay here?"Wekids got all excited and wanted to go off too.They came to me to ask what to do;Isaid I couldn't leave now because I had responsibilities.Other students told me thatIwas a fool,that they just appointed me because they wanted to control me.I thoughtabout it and later that night decided to go in the morning..School authorities knew verywell what was going on outside, so when I told them I was leaving, they didn't use theirusual harsh criticism to stop me.They were very nice, polite.Then I realized theyknew about the red guard movement and were worried.The next day I left withanother 12 students, went back to town. They sent us back on trucks.Chuanlian: Wuhu, Nanjing

Up to this point, nobody had tried to chuanlian in the town. Parents wereworried; we were so young and had never travelled before. The major problem for mewas money. I had none, and my family was poor. I went to my father's old apprentice;wrote to him about the historical significance of the CR, the necessity of participating,etc., and asked for money. He was poor; he wrote back anyway and lent me8yuan.We didn't realize then that you could get these things for free on the road.

So 13 of us set out.The school gave us a red flag, with hongweibing changzhengdui printed on it.And we had red guard armbands with the following embroidered onit:Yun Xiao zhan xiao (Xuancheng zhongxue) [Yun and Xiao were the surnames of oldCCP revolutionaries from the 3Os who died at the hands of the KMT, and who werealumni of the school)

The red guards in Xuancheng were already involved in po sijiu. BecauseXuancheng was historically important,it was rich in cultural heritage. Many famouswriters and painters were born in or lived in Xuancheng,like Li Bo and Xie Tiao,bothgreat poets. There were many historical monuments, temples, and so forth that werecompletely destroyed. Many good private collections of old books, calligraphy, andpaintings. The red guards searched door to door and carted all of these things away.Even in villages peasants might have some good copies of the Confucian classics; theywere often destroyed too.SStreets with historical names were changed.They even triedto change the name of the county to Hongwei Xian.But the state council disapprovedthe request. This was what all the red guards did then. Did nothing against theauthorities.Everybody in the city called themselves red guards then--workers, students,white collar workers.ILater the termbeecame more restrictive.Then beingaredguardbecame a political privilege.

On our "long march" we walked to Wuhu, and there saw many red guards whowere out for tourism,not to steel themselves with hardship.But we also read manydazibao and handbills that attacked leaders and individuals in units and schools,and inthe government. I was very impressed with their radicalism and self-confidence. Thered guards talked like they were important officials--about national affairs,the interestsof China.Very impressive.Also their courage--in attacks on powerholders,use of allresources like paper, ink, flour (to make paste). I was impressed with their ability to getmaterial resources to carry out propaganda.They just went to government offices anddemanded things: offices, cars, printing presses, material supplies, food. Wherever theywent, they got what they demanded. This was a realization of what it meant to be themasters of China. Before this I never dreamed of getting anything from the government

No. 139

4withoutpaying.SuddenlyIrealized everythingbelonged to us and everythingwould beatourservice.

By the time we got to Nanjing we tried to get money from the government. Wewent to the hongweibing jiedaizhan of the city government.It was crowded with redguards. That was the first time I ever went into a heated building. That reallyimpressed me.I asked the official for 45 yuan,but he said he could give us no morethan 20, so I immediately accepted, and wrote out an i.o.u., leaving my student i.d. cardnumber. This was very revolutionary, I thought. First time in my life I asked formoney from the party.The first time I did this I asked for money as if I were apetitioner. The second time I demanded it as a right. When they tried to refuse me,Isaid "how dare you obstruct Chairman Mao's CR!" And of course they would then giveus what we wanted. I used this method to get accomodations in Nanjing later on.Sofrom this point on I demanded things from the party wherever I went.If they turnedme town I felt thatmy rights were violated and that the official was trying to obstructthe CR.Political Thinking and Motivation (5/28/90,3 hrs.)

So at this point in Nanjing I began to identify myself with the revolution.Beforethe CR seemed remote,but suddenlyI became a part ofit.I felt that I was therevolution.At this point I began to realize that the CR had close connections witheveryday concrete aspects of a person's life. It had to go with the governmentorganizations you had to depend on, people you knew for a long time.In your life,notjust in the newspapers.Direct links existed between your life and unit and events inBeijing. If Wuhu red guards can denounce school authorities, the party secretary of thecity, and their neighbors, why can't we do this in Xuancheng? So the CR becametangible to us.

Motives came from many different directions and levels.In terms of the schoolitself, for a long time I felt I was mistreated,and all other students with same kind ofpersonality, politics, and intellectual orientation. The good boys always would tinghua.By mistreated,I mean that even if you are a true believer in the party,Mao,therevolution,if you fail to follow the smallest order from teachers or administrators,youwere regarded as a bad person,a moral deviant. I really hated when they criticized youand gave you moral pressures.

For example, there was a good library in the school. It had good novels, Chinesefiction and foreign literature in translation.Informally,a norm existed that students ofcertain ages aren't supposed to read certain kinds of books; but there was never anyformal regulation about this,or any clear standards,really.There were two sections ofthe library,one for students and another for teachers only. But what I'm talking aboutis just the books on the student side.When I was in the first year of junior school, Itook out and read Gorky's history of Russian literature in the study hall.The classcounselor, who I realized later wasn't really a bad guy, was a Chinese literature teacher.He was curious about the book I was reading, since it was very thick and lookeddifferent from the books we normally read,and had vertical lines since it was publishedin the 1950s.I said,"Gorky".He asked why I was reading it. I said I liked Russiannovels and I was interested. He said no, this book is for college concentrators, not you.Can you understand it, he asked？ I said, some of it,but its ok. He got a reallydisgusted look on his face,as if I had violated some hidden moral law.

Another example.Calligraphy was mandatory.You had to practice at least 1

No.139

5page a day.They had two standard zhengkai models from the Tang dynasty, verystraight and clear, that we were all supposed to emulate.But beginning in my 3rd yearIpracticed the art of calligraphy.Many people had told me that I was at a fairly highlevel, and had even begun to develop my own style. I began to borrow different, moreflowing styles to copy and learn from.So this teacher comes to my desk and sees mycharacters are different from the others andchange fromweek to weekasI tryout newstyles. He actually liked my calligraphy very much.But he didn't want me to departfrom the types of characters he was using in the class. I thought, why can't I changestyles and write as Ilike?

Also, in political study, reading Mao's works and so forth, I always had my ownindividual perspective, interpretation, of the writings. These things were immediatelyreported to the teachers,and sometimes the teachers would report even higher on what Ihad said.Then when the whole class met, the teacher would warn you without namingyou, and all the other students would turn their eyes to look at you, because they allknew who he was talking about.The students who got the best treatment were obedientbut just average intellectually. The most hateful thing was they were alwasy makingreports on you.I hated all this so much that I wanted to change it.

A second reason for my activism, based on what I saw in Wuhu and Nanjing: thepolitical threat to the country,the revolution,and to Mao.I hadn't had much contactwith officials at my age, little sense of them. Had little idea how much they deviatedfrom the ideals we were taught in school.When I read posters I was really surprised athowofficial behavior deviated from these ideals.These revelationsreally affected me andI felt I must also apply these lessons to Xuancheng. For example, how little timeofficials devote to the study of Mao's works; how small a percentage Mao's works andthe classics of Marxism are in libraries;how Mao's works are not prominently displayedin bookstores;how many cadres do not go to the countryside or factories to work;whatkinds of living standard to they have, cars, fine clothes, servants,etc.

Now everything began to make a lot of sense to me in political terms.Now ifone person was bad,I had a framework for understanding why--a framework provided byMao Thought. This intellectually and psychologicallywasveryimportant tome.I nowhad a framework for relating all these facts together.Noweverythingmade perfectsense, you could see beneath the surface to the real meaning.

Of course,I saw this all was connected to my treatment in the school.Theteachers only wanted to train obedient tools (xunfu gongiu),as I now saw. But Maowanted to train revolutionary successors. So I came to the conclusion now that all thesethings were connected together into one big,huge,hidden, secret plot--to turn Chinaaway from the revolutionary path,to change China's color.So everything I did andwould do would make a difference for this cause.

A third reason, also very powerful in influencing me and I think many of myfriends:we were discontented with the backwardness of our locality,with the negativeside of daily life in our locality. Before my revolutionary trips I had never been outsideof Xuancheng.Nothing to compare it to.But after reading posters in Wuhu andNanjing,I got a framework in my mind.Why was Xuancheng so backward still? Whyso few factories?Why still manual labor for carryingheavy loads?Whyso backwardtechnically? Why so few rural roads, so few tractors and other machines?Whynopublic buses?Why so little good housing?The fundamental reason,I concluded,wasthat officials did not follow Mao's correct line and didn't do the revolutionary jobproperly, didn't develop Xuancheng's industry and agriculture, welfare system. All

No.139

6caused by political and ideological misorientation.The standard waswhetheryou weredevoted to building a strong, great,more advanced China with a better life for thepeople.A better life both materially and morally or politically as well,where people arethe masters of the country.If cadres misuse their power they mistreat the real masters.They took things that really belonged to people.Now you should take them back.Thiswas our standard in assessing leaders.RedGuardMovement inHefeiObserved

After Nanjing, since it was extremely difficult to cross the river by ferry to Pukouto get the train to Beijing (still no bridge across the Yangzi there yet),I decided I couldgo to Beijing anytime, and I should go back to Xuancheng and carry out the revolution.I was gone only for about two weeks or 20 days or so.Spent almost all of my timereading wallposters,not seeing the sights or shopping as many red guards were doing.Ididn't have any money anyway. So I went back to Xuancheng very briefly. I distributedall the handbills, papers, and other materials I had collected in Nanjing and Wuhu, andtold the students what was going on outside.

Things had already1begun to change in the school.It was now early December.Before I left,most posters in school criticized the three family village. But now therewere many on campus that attacked specific individuals by name. And in the city itself,there were many posters directly attacking officials. The city was said to resemble aturtle,with the school at the high point,the head,and the city center on the second，lower hill.There were two main roads,about 2 km in length each that crossed theturtle's back diagonally,connected opposite feet.Where they crosseddwasthecity'scenter, and that's the intersection where all the wallposters were put up. I guess that redguards from Hefei and Shanghai and other towns had come through to spread therevolution.You see, Xuancheng was on the road to Huang Shan.

I stayed in Xuancheng very briefly, only a couple of weeks. By this time the redguardgroups were very well developed. So I got back with so much material andinformation,they decided I was really serious and decided to send me as their liaisonperson (lianluo yuan) to Hefei. They had sent out a number of liaison persons and theynever seemed to return. So,still in December, I left for Hefei.I stayed there about twoweeks or so.I stayed at Hefei teachers college, with a guy from Xuancheng. Twoschools there were most active in the CR, that school and Hefei Industrial College(gongyi daxue),the one I would attend in the future.I went every day to theheadquarters of the red guard organization and to the offices of their newspaper,whichwas already ofpretty high quality.

We categorized CR papers according to two types:qianyin (lead type letterpress)and youyin (mimeograph). The latter was very primitive.You cut a wax paper stencilwith a steel pencil on ametal plate by hand.Then you rolled the ink over the stencilonto the paper. If you were skilled at it, you could make 1oo0 copies with one stencil.If you weren't,it might break after only 50 copies.I learned this process very quicklyand alsohow to get supplies.The most valued people in redguard organizations werethose with the skills to cut the stencils and roll the ink

Already in Hefei the red guard organizations were very well developed andrationalized. They had a newspaper editorial section, which usually got highest priorityThey also had,in addition to this xiaobao bianji bu,a guangbo zhan,both of these wereunder the xuanchuan zu.They had a houqin zu (for supplies),a zuzhi zu (membership),baowei zu (security,more important later on when the fighting began),a lianluo bu

No.139(liaison work,divided into subgroups according to the target:other student red guardsworkers, peasants,regular urban dwellers,regular office workers), a shouji ziliao zu (forcollecting material published by other red guard organizations), a zhuan'an zu (forinvestigations,important later on).They even had separate sections for xiaoneidouzhengandxiaowai douzheng.Theywerealreadypretty active outside their schoolseven though the authorities in Beijing said to emphasize within the school. The bigcities were more advanced.

So in HefeiI learned printing and the methods of organization for redguardgroups. I also learned the skills of coordination with other red guard organizations.Theyoftenheldlianxi huiyitowhichtheysendxietiaozuorxietiaoyuan.Theywenttomeet and discuss who would be the main targets in the next stage of the movement.There were many universities in Hefei, so coordination work of this kind was veryimportant. There was also coordination work to be done with high school red guards.

I went to establish liaison with the college, and not high school red guards ofHefei for a couple of reasons. First, Hefei was a big city and an important place, and weall worshipped universities and university students. Also,I knew the student fromXuancheng, and could stay in the dormitory with him.That was of great practicalimportance.

So I learned one big thing on this trip:there's no limit to what you can do ortry. No door should be closed to you.When I reached this level of consciousness,wholerelationship between me and others,between me and other organizations totally changed.I now had a very clear sense that I would be the one to carry out the changes and makethings happen. If I failed to do this, I failed to carry out the revolution and be arevolutionary successor.Before the CR,everywhere there were limits on what you coulddo.Now all the limitations were lifted.If you failed now,nobody else's fault,not theteachers', administrators, or the xuesheng ganbu, whom we hated most of all.

My greatest experience in Hefei was when we surrounded the provincial partycommittee building..This was an eye opening experience for me.The main participantswere red guards,but also some workers and urban dwellers from different units.Surrounded it for 3 days near the end of the year.Thousands of red guardsparticipated. The compound and building is very big, and the square in front is verylarge too. Students surrounded the building and demanded that Li Baohua, First partysecretary of the province and member of the party central committee,3rd1partysecretaryof the east China military district (2nd was Chen Peixian,lst was Ke Qingshi but postempty now because he died). Also he was first commissar of the Anhui military districtHe was the son of Li Dazhao.Red guards demanded he come outside and confess beforethem.This really was a radical demand at this stage,many people didn't support itbecause Li was really considered to be one who really cared about the welfare of localpeople, one who would risk himself to challenge above levels to protect his locality, andwas not corrupt and ran a clean administration..Anhui wasoneof the 4 worstprovincesduring the 3 lean years.So many people died. It was ruled then by Zheng Xishen, avery tough and ruthless leader who caused much suffering.My mother's older sister,forexample,had 34 people in her family in an Anhui village; only 5 survived the famine.

Li Baohua was appointed in 1962;when he came he did 3 things:allow peasantstofentian dangan(sanzlyibao),allow the opening ofrural free markets,and rehabilitate

Lthe cadres who had opposed the extreme leftist policies of ZhengXishen.Like a goodQing official, Li often dressed as an ordinary person to go to small places and see whatwas really going on. There were many legendary stories about this: his moral stature,

No.139

8his care for the people

But now the red guards demanded that he confess,because all of these 3 thingsare considered as evidence that he followed Liu Shaoqi's revisionist line.This actuallywasprobably true.hewas sent down to right the suffering caused by the ultra-leftismof the GLF.He had been first deputy minister of Water Conservation and Power beforebeing sent to Anhui.

When peasants around Hefei heard there were some crazy students demandingthat Li Baohua confess, this hit them like a bomb.There was also a very strongreaction from urban workers,who became the relatively conservative baohuang pai, theywere called the laochi,or chiwei dui.Their organization was full of activists, partymembers,union organization workers who benefitted from pre-CR policies.

All students surrounded this typical, heavy, gray, Soviet style building of about 6stories,maybe the biggest in town.For 3 days and nights nobody came out, and eventhough it began to snow, students refused to leave.Someeven threateneda hungerstrike.There were rumors in town that thousands were starving themselves and thatmany students had already died. But that was an exaggeration, there was no such thingthere.But the scene really was something;snow-covered students shouting slogans.

Right before noon,two redguards appeared on the balcony above and announced:Quiet, we got him!"(We had heard earlier that his aides were planning to send him to amilitary base to protect him.Those rumors led to the surrounding of the building.)When we heard that,the shouting of slogans got louder and louder.Then a man cameout, without a hat, totally expressionless,with two red guards holding his arms behindhim.He was wearing a long cotton olive drab coat, military style.Very white face,softskin, slightly fat. You could tell he had a good life. No emotion on his face, eyesdowncast to the floor.The whole square suddenly became absolutely quiet,because thisman had been respected,worshipped, loved. He came from Beijing, from the centralcommittee,and was #1 in the entire province.His father was one of the party'sfounding fathers.Now here he is like this,humiliated.The silence lasted about 3 or 4seconds, then everyone started yelling"Down with Li Baohua! If he refuses to surrenderwe'll finish him off! We oppose Liu Shaoqi, we support Chairman Mao!" and slogans likethat.

Li Baohua was still silent.he refused to speak.No violence at this point of thered guard movement. We just used pressure on people to get them to confess. Thewhole thing lastonly 10 to 15minutes,so the red guards on the balconywereembarrassed and sent him back inside.

But meanwhile things were happening elsewhere in town. Groups of suburbanpeasants were said to be marching on the city to support Li. They were said to be fromSiji Qing Commune (Four Seasons Green).A very conservative commune of vegetablemarketers,several main conservative organizations had their stronghold there.I didn'tactually witness this.

But I did witness the conflict among the workers.The streets in the area of theprovincial headquarters were full of people, many standing on the street corners arguingwith one another about Li Baohua,whether he was good or bad. These were mainlyworkers.It was most crowded near the compound.There some chiwei dui memberswere trying to push students away from the building. But some radical worakers weretrying to resist them and protect the students.The radicals and conservatives wereyelling and threatening to beat one another up.There was a lot of pushing and shovingbut no beatings or drawing of blood. A huge shouting and shoving match. After seeing

No. 139

9all of this, I felt my mission in Hefei was fulfilled. Now the secret of making revolutionwas in my hands

I learned two significant things about these 3 days. First, you can challenge anddisgrace any individual in authority, because you have Mao's direct support. Second,class struggle is more complicated thatyou had thought before.Even though we struckat Li Baohua,so many students were trying to protect him.TThis meant he was verysophisticated and crafty.He could mobilize peasants and workers to protect hismistaken line, and that they can even engage in violence. And the closer the strugglegets to the party center, the headquarters of revisionism,the more dangerous and trickythe strugglebecomes.

This iswhat I felt at the time.But later I felt that the Hefei red guards did thistoLi Baohuanot because of anythinghedid himself,but just did this to imitatewhatthe red guards did in Beijing.This is because later,when we started to do similarthings in Xuancheng,I began to have some inner doubts about what we were doing tothe officials.I realized thatwereally didn'thave any evidence at all,we just had theidea that officials werebad and then tried to force them to confess.But I began towonder myself, and admitted to myself we didn't really have any evidence, and thus tomyself I rethought what I had seen in Hefei. This was just a big process of apeing, fromoneleveldowntoanother.Qingyang Incident of January 14 (5/30/90,3 hrs.)

He arrived back just before New Year's Day.When he got back he started toupgrade the material base of the Red Guard organization.Whenhegotbackhe broughta simple mimeograph machine to uprgrade the paper. he got money in the waysuggested by the Hefei red guards.He suggested his group hold roundtable discussionswith the school leaders to establish budget agreement about the amount theywould givemonthly for their support; offices for the organization; dormitory spaces for theorganization's people (different organizations were given different dorms);red cottoncloth for armband;red silk for flags,a bi-weely allotment of paper of different qualitiesand sizes; ink;flour forpaste;medical supplies for first aid;equipment for indoor/outdoorp.a. system; guaranteed supply of electricity. He learned these practical methods fromthe red guards in Hefei.Schools in general were much more willing to give supplies inkind rather than cash.Each unit,according to regulations, had to establish a wenhuageming jijin, a fund from which they were to supplyeguallyvarious reddguardorganizations without prejudice,according to their membershipbase.I gave themsuggestions to do this. At this tage of the CR the organization of the movements wasstill very vague, no clear organizational divisions.There were a few students reallyactive (about 1/4) and the rest were passive. By active, I mean they came to theorganization’s office every day,and if they were assigned a task,they would do itwillingly, and would take some initiative.

This was about the first week of 1967.At that time we heard there was a bigconflict in Qingyang county,in a mountain district near the border with Hubei. Isolatedplace,very important in explaining these events. The Qingyang county students,whichthere as everywhere represented the most radical section of the population,just cameback from the big cities where they had seen advanced stages of the CR.The rest of thepopulation had not seen these advanced stages. So there was conflict between thepopulation and the students. The Qingyang student red guards had demanded thatcounty leaders confess,and tried to capture them for a struggle meeting.The

No. 139

10population, isolated from the rest of the country, thought this was outrageous. How canyou do this to the leaders,things usually done only to class enemies and landlords?Theleaders fought back with words,but the peasants resisted with arms.Theyused thepoles used for carrying loads on their shoulders in the mountains.Normally these poles(biandan),in other parts of China, are just of bamboo.But in this region,which is notin the plains, the poles are made of heavy,hard, strong wood, and on each end is a steeltip used to pierce a bundle of brush that has been cut for carrying to the market.

So thousands of these shanmin,or mountain men,carryingtthesesteeltippedpoles, surrounded the county seat. The student red guards, who had surrounded thecounty headquarters, were in turn surrounded by the peasants. The county authoritieshad sent out an s.o.s. to the villages through the commune and brigadeegovernments.who mobilized their village militias. They threatened the red guards,who told them ifthey went any further, they were dead. So the red guards sent out an s.o.s. of theirown,to Xuancheng, Anqing,Wuhu, Jiujiang,and even Hefei for help for the radicalstudents.

A big support team was organized by radical students and workers in these placesto rescue the students of Qingyang. More than 80 trucks were mobilized from Wuhuand Xuancheng region.Wuhu was the stronghold of the radical rebels early in the CRand had a lot of factories,each factory had its own trucks..We brought medicine,foodpropaganda materials, broadcasting equipment, etc., just like a rescue force. Xuanchengsupplied 20-30 trucks,each one with 20-30 people on it.

I was on one of the first trucks,was active in propaganda section so we were putup front. We got there about 8pm, already dark, since it was winter. We got there andturned on all the headlights. The peasants had never before seen so many trucks linedup like this, so many headlights, roar of the engines, loudspeakers blaring slogans. Itlooked like a huge loud dragon winding its way along the side of the mountain.Thelocal peasants were frightened and without a fight let us through into the town.As wepassed, we told them there were more trucks coming. After we got into town, thecounty authorities sent out another s.o.s. for more peasant militiamen. Theings becomemore and more tense.The peasants said,“laozi bu wen ni shiliu shiqi tiao, laozi zhi youbiandan yitiao". In other words,we don't care if you have 16 articles or 17 articles,wehave our one article,our poles.They said this because we were telling them wendou buyao wudou and we quoted them the 16 articles of Mao and the central committee.

More peasants came out and again blocked the road.I heard then that thesecond wave came with guns. The militias task was to protect the party andgovernment, which were now in danger.We were very scared,not just because they hadguns, but because these were mountain men.The peasants said, we run into tigers allthe time up in the mountains,but we take care of them,are you more dangerous than atiger? They also said, "with words, I can't take you, but with fists, I can take five ofyou!"

We decided to pressure the county leaders to order them back.The countyleaders said they didn't come because they were ordered,but because the poor and lowermiddle peasants have high revolutionary consciousness and love the party.They said,"talk to them, not us."We decided one evening after dinner about 7 pm,if the countyleaders refused to order them back,we would begin a hunger strike at midnight.Thiswas called the yiyiba shijian, or the January 14 incident. There was already developinga food shortage because of the blockade. Peasants were already telling us that if westayed we would starve because we didn't belong there.This was my first and last

No.139

11hunger strike.Lasted 2 1/2 days.We all sat on the ground facing the partyheadquarters,about 1500. Most of us were students.Workers stood around outside toguardagainst peasant attacks.

Early afternoon on the third day,the leaders of the rescue team and the localstudents came out and said we had obtained victory.The cultural revolution small groupin Beijing, with Chen Boda as chief, Jiang Qing and Kang Sheng as first deputies, senttelegraph to the county part;y committee, ordering them to meet immediately all thedemandsof the students andguarantee their safetyy and prevent violence.It stressed oneprinciple, that it is absolutely forbidden to mobilize peasants to storm the towns. TheCR was begun by Mao himself and the red guards are teams under his leadrship.Toharm them is to attackChairmanMaoand iss by definition anti-party,anti-revolutionary,and anti-Mao.Sofrom that time forward throughout China,it was forbidden to usepeasants to protect local leaders from red guard criticism.Leaders must always go tostruggle sessions.They mmust never mobilize the peasants or army to protect them.This was one of the first such incidents that led to this policy statement.

Then the county leaders said they had misunderstood, that the red guards didn'tjust want to make trouble,that they wanted to educate them.They then broadcast theorder that peasants should return home,along with the red guards and rebels from othercities.·Don't know what happened after we left between the local redlguardsandthelocal cadres.The telegram was our victory,so we went home.Igguess thatthe leaderswould have submitted to struggle session though, because a telegram from Beijing is apretty big thing.PoliticalMentality at this Point in the Movement

From this point through August, early September, is when we developed ourorganization and factional conflicts developed..By summer 1967 there was realwarfare,that was an important turning point in the movement,but we'll get to that later. Butat this point the main activitywas to establish a link between local leaders and LiuShaoqi.Red guards in other areas had already compiled extnesive cases against LiuShaoqi,his history, personal relations, pre and post 1949 activities and speeches, policylines,everything.We similarly tried to establish links between Liu Shaoqi and LiBaohua,between Li and cadres at the prefectural capital in Wuhu, and the local leadersin Xuancheng. The last part of this work was done by us.We tried to developextensive case of connections between local leaders and the revisionist line to show thatthere had been a comprehensive revisionist program in the ideological and organizationallevels.And that Liu Shaoqi,through this extensive network,worked against ChairmanMao's line ofmaking China a more revolutionary country.

At an earlier point, we were against individual leaders,not necessarily the system.But now all these organizational links are established in the minds of red guards, butincreasingly now we were coming to see what we opposed as a hidden, vast network, aconspiracy that had links nationwide to Liu,and even internationally between Liu andKhrushchev, Kim IlSung, and other leading revisionists. Kim Ilsung was especiallyresentedbytheredguardsbecausehealsodare pretent that such a smallleaderof anunimportant country could be like Mao,with his own selected works and theoriesdeclaring him a great theorist and marxist-leninist. At one point in Beijing the redguards burned Kim's works and portraits, and criticized him for not quoting Mao in hisown writings,and not basing his theories on Chairman Mao's principles. This createdsome real frictions diplomatically at that time. Our purpose in attacking individuals at12

No. 139this point was now to separate the real party from the abstract party,because the realparty was riddled with this hidden, organized conspiracy. No longer is the party theembodiment of Chairman Mao's line.This was a veryyimportantdevelopment.

We often faced the question,if all these party organizations are mistaken,wrong,then where is the party?Those we struggled against would defend themselves in thisway.We responded in this way. First, the party is not an organization,the party is anideal,a thought,a theory.Lenin said without a theory tthere could be no party orrevolution. Mao said without theory you cannot talk about organizations or parties. Wesaid while its true you participate in an organization, this does not mean in your workand thoughtyou represent the spirit of the party and revolution,the thought ofChairman Mao.Mao's party works,but it works not through you,but through his ideas

So our task was, even thought we weren't in the party, we are the personalcarriers of the party's spirit,because we represent the essence of Mao Zedong's thoughtIn these debates we always won over the party cadres.This was not just rhetoric to windebates. I genuinely believed this.I really believed there was an actual conspiracy.What had first most immpressed me about the red guards in Wuhu was their power ofintellectual penetration;they could see through the surface to the actual comspiracieshidden underneath the surface.This was a powerful insight and now I was practicing ittoo. I.was really convinced there was a secret conspiracy against Chairman Mao. Giventhis conviction,I would find political crimeseverywhere.Ilost my trust in peoplebecause if such high individuals as Liu and Li Baohua could do all these terrible thingsthen can't all the people who surround you too? If you can't see the bad intentions,evilthings, behind the attractive face, it only demonstrates that you are a fool, a politicaldupe.If you can discover all the bad intentions and evil plans hidden beneath thesurface, you prove yourself as a true Marxist, a man of insight, of true revolutionaryspirit,among tthe best people to lead the country's future and indeed the whole humanrace.This conviction gave me and my close friends a restless spirit--no matter whatharsh words we have used,we were convinced that there were still more hidden crimesto uncover.You should go step by step to uncover them and leave nothing uncovered.With this spirit, we go to every office, every leaders' home, every personnel archive, touncover the hidden revisionist elements, the conspiracy against Mao, the falserevolutionaries,the sugar-coated bullets..So we were never satisfied with what we did tothe party leaders.We felt satisfied that we had the highest wisdom; we couldunderstand everything,no matter how complicated,with this theory in our hands. Redguards like me had unlimited confidence in our correctness and insight.

I would not say that at this time we consciously thought this, but this is mydescription now of the way we felt, even though it was not so self-reflective at the time.Xuancheng Red Guard Movement

In the earliest stage of the red guard movement,late July and early August toOctober,it was a top down movement,like the youth league.Each classroom had itsown'red guard activities.Students from red family backgrounds with good recordswithin the school. At this point the red guard movement was not that exclusive.70-80% were red guards in my class of 47.The sense of exclusiveness and selectivenessdeveloped when the CR in the locality launched attacks on concrete persons.At thispoint we only attacked novels,movies, authors.

Around November-December,the red guards decided after the revolutionary trip toorganize themselves differently because the old ones were established and manipulated by13

No.139the school leaders,who should now be the targets of the movement.So naturally wejust set aside the old organizations and nobody stuck around to try to defend it.Nowwe began to build up our own organizations based on our own decisions of would couldjoin,who would be leaders, what the name will be.

The names of the red guard groups were important symbolically to us. We allhad distinctive names.At this point you could judge the degree of radicalism of anorganization by its name.Dongfang hong (east is red),xiangyang (facing the sun),chaoyang（ditto),gongnongbing(worker-peasant-soldier),hongqi,these were conservativeorganizations with close connctions to the pre-CR politics and indoctrination.Thestranger and rarer the names, the more radical the group.The most radicalgroups hadnames beyond the understanding of ordinary people.For example, gui jian chou (looselydemons who see us worry).Now if ordinary people saw these characters together,theywould think it was a very odd name. Good names are supposed to be positive, notnegative and odd like this.

There were also in-between names.The symbolism was like the differencebetween early2Oth century realism and Picasso's abstract art.There's a kind of changein the mentality,anti-traditional,expressed in the odd,anti-traditional,anti-commonsense names of the most radical organizations.Our name wasalsoanti-traditional:bayibabaodongtuan(August 18 InsurrectionaryCorps).There was also a danxiao gui (timiddemons),which is virtually the oposite of what the meaning should be.Anotherone:qitian dasheng, another name from the Journey to the West, it means, great sage high inthe heavens. A friend of mine had his own organization, he alone was in it, and hepublished his own newspaper. he claimed his own funds and vote based on hismembership of one.His organization's name was typical of the symbolism,the monkeychallenged the emperor as being on the same level as him.The implication is that thisorganization (or person) has the nerve to challenge anybody,he is trying to show he isvery anti-traditional.

You could usually tell how far the organization wants to go by their names. Ifsymbols or terms of the pre-CR period are used,we can tell they don't want to rebelagainst the authorities or give the authorities the impression they want to make trouble.Conservative names showed continuity with the pre-CR period and the current CRperiod. But the more odd radical names showed the rupture between the pre-CR andthe contemporary era.Shows we are in a completely new era.Our organization's namewas the first radical organization, so it was a radical name for its time.Once therebellion became accepted,the names got much stranger.But we kept our organizationsname because we had our own history and famebythattime.Therewas another groupthat we used to put up our wallposters, zhonghuo dui,or "arson brigade". That was areal radical name.These were all names of organizations in our school, except forguijian chou.

When we tried to build our own redd guard organization, one thing was veryfunny. All the previous red guard memberships were over. We were a small groupsitting together in the classroom.About 2/3 of my class seemed very reluctant to join us.They were all happy to abolish the old red guard organizations,but they were notwilling to join the new one we were trying to organize. I guess in their eyes, studentslike me would naturally do strange things, so they were reluctant to join. But after theysaw we had our own armband and our own flag at the rallies,some students in the classbecame interested.The first who came up to us were the students who were not favoredby the school authorities in the past. They felt they had something in common with

No.139

14those of us who organized the group:we weren't good boys of the teachers in the past,we didn't report on you, we weren't activists. The most brave troublemakers establishedthe organization,the second rung of troublemakers would them join,and others stayedaway.There was a guy who came to us to apply whose Dad was a vice president ofAnhui Labor University, which moved in 1962 from Hefei to Xuancheng's suburbs. Thiswas abig deal to have sucha high rank,grade1l or 12.Hisdad already wasunderattack by red guards at his university.We told him if he wanted to join,he had tobiaotaiabouthisdad'sproblem.Heinthe past hadbeen criticizedasatroublemakerbythe teachers.He said he thought his father had made a mistake,the CR could help himbe educated.We said ok, you want to join you need to show your commitment to theCR,you don't sound really committed to revolution.you have to draw a clear class linebetween you and your father. Politically, you are your father's enemy,even thoughbiologically, he is your father.We told him to stand up before the whole class and yell"Dadao Zhu Minzhi"several times.He really was reluctant but he finally did it,eventhough he was nervous and embarrassed at the beginning.This was the first time weever saw his face turn red.That showed what pressure it created within him to do this.(This guy was a good friend of mine.He committed suicide in 1978 for unrelatedreasons.He failed the college entrance exams and his father criticized him very harshlyHe went to a mountain and hung himself on a tree.They found his decomposed body 4days later).Red Guard Organizations (6/7/90,3 hrs.)

During CR, I was not heavily involved in organizational issues. I was very young,most of red guard leaders were senior high students. Second was because of mypersonality..I was so impatient and ideological I couldnt’compromise. So I stayed awayfrom organizational issues.

From early 1967 to the summer is the stage I'm talking about now. First half ofthis year the organizations changed a great deal.First,there is a new base for themembership ofred guardsI talkedabout last time.Second therewas a realorganizational split between radical students and the others.The others were mainlyxiaoyao pai, some in organizations passively, about 1/3 to 1/2 were members, but largelyon papers.AsfarassI could tell,the xiaoyao paiincluded many of the acaademicallyoutstanding students, especially in the senior section. I often asked them why theystayed away, because the CR was so important.They replied that they just wanted toconcentrate their time on studying, because they figured that when the CR was over theywould reopen the universities and competition would begin again.Theywanted toprepare themselves.

That was the first type ofxiaoyao pai.The second type are not academicallyoutstanding, but they came from families with problems. Like a rightist father, zhaimaozi you pai,a rightist with the cap removed. They feared that thheir activism in CRmight generate new troubles for their families.Same goes for rich peasant,landlordfamilies.These were the families of dead tigers silaohu,their fathers had been killedseveral times already in the various movements.The third type ofxiaoyao pai arechildren from elite families.Xuancheng middle school drew widely in admissions,from 8counties and two cities.In some cases this extended to areas in the north of Anhui,likeHefei.Butmost students came from area surrounding Xuancheng,both sides of theYangzi River.This was called an all province recruitment school.So quite a number ofstudents came from families of county officials, leading cadres in prefecture and city.

No.139

15From Wuhu, Anqing, Ma'anshan, and from the military. These students at the beginningof the CRwere eithermembers of theofficial red guards and were appointed leaders inthe beginning, or were regular red guard members.They felt their future wasguaranteed,so they kept quiet,and were conformist. But by the stage when studentsbegan to organize on their own,and began to develop their own political lines,especiallywhen local officials began to be attacked, these people stayed away.

But this kind of xiaoyao pai,their feelings and gestures are very different fromthe secondkind ofxiaoyao pai..Different in two ways.Thepotentialpolitical threatofa political campaign is an old story to children of the black categories.Theyhad longbeen discriminated against, so psychologically they wre well prepared. But the cadre kidswere totally shocked.Whenever their parents taken away to struggle meetings,theywould get very upset, cry,couldn't eat or sleep.Second difference is thatwith thedevelopment in the CR of the radical mentality,the dead tiger family kids became moreand more released,incontrast to the cadre family kids,who became more and morethreatened and himilited,discriminated against.The reason is that with the localdevelopment of the political process,red guards turned their attention away from thedead tigers of the CR,who weren't the main target of the CR,according to Mao..Thecadre family kids were finding that more and more of their family members were gettingin trouble.And the words against thembecame harsher and harsher in the handbillsand wallposters.And accordingly,the social status and political reputation of thesestudents in theschoolbecame thatof a symbolof thenewenemies.Privately,studentsfrom dead tiger families evencelebrated the increasedd pressure and humiliation of thecadre families.They felt that now the noble lords,tu huangdi,were finally getting ataste ofwhat it means to be criticized and discriminated against and treated as anoffspring of an enemy of the people.So privately, they were very happy. So that wasthe xiaoyao pai.

The baohuang pai were the other faction.In the first stage of the red guardmovement,baohuang pai meant what it literally says.Certain red guards are closelyidentified with certain local leaders,with lo;cal policies of those leaders.And when otherstudents or red guards criticized these leaders or policies,these so called baohuang paistudentswould comeout todefend them.There wasaverydirect linkbetween theleaders and the studenets.Butwhen the local red guard movementsbecme more radical,the term baohuang pai became more and more misused.If I don't like cretainindividuals or groups, even though they are within the radical camp, we would call thembaohuang pai..In this way, only the ;mo;st radical and extremist were safe against thischarge. They would look at everyone more moderate than them and call them baohuangpai.So by 1967 the meaning of this term changed.

At this pointvery fewredguardsweredefendingleaders of the school or thetown.No one was so foolish at this point.What makes them different from us is thatthey just do things strictly within the limit of the official newspapers or documents fromthe center.We,one the other hand,just wanted to push things beyond the limits,to useour own terms.We said they were led by policies,we lead the policies.The moreappropriate term for them isnotreallyybaohuangpaibutsimplyyless radical.Theysupported their activities by quoting specific documents, articles, etc.We legitimized ouractivities by quoting from the writings of the early Mao,like his writings when he washimself a radical student leader in the Xiangjiang pinglun.And also his later writingson the peasant movement, and so forth. We also began to explore new legitimatingsources from Lenin,Stalin,Marx and Engels. First, from Lenin, whose writings were

No.139

16clear and had fighting spirit, and harsh in words. Especially his debate with Kautskyand the revisionists of the second international. We liked these because we wereconvinced there were revisionists both within the red guard movement and in the partyand government.

An example.At this point there are two channels of documents from above.First from the established institutions like party central committee and state council.Second channel was from the central cultural revolution group.On the whole,and I'mspeaking very generally here, we preferred documents from the latter channel. Moreimportantly,among all the documents passed down,some which seemed more supportiveof our radical imagination we just loved,quoted widely.The documents advisedmoderation and self-restraint,especially those emphasizing production,not disruptingindustry and agriculture,transportation.The mood in this kind of document were quitecontrary to us and we didn't like them.But all these documents were issued byauthorities at the highest level.We can't denounce the party center or the state council,but we tried to denounce certain documents or certain lines or tifa.We criticized thesetifa by quoting Lenin in his debate with revisionists and Kautsky.That is why weparticularly liked the writings of Lenin in the internal conflicts of the internationalcommunist movement. These seemed much more relevant to;us in mentality, moodspirit.·Sometimes we quoted Stalin's writings but we were not particularly interested inhis works.The language and style seemed quite boring,not stimulating orpsychologically exciting..But Lenin’s works were much sharper. Also, ideologicallyLenin was greater than Stalin. The level or standard of red guard radicalism isestablished by how far they are willing to depart from the standard texts in supportingtheir stands. The more radical the redaguards, the more resourcefully they tried toexplore other, especially earlier writings. If a redI guard can quote Lenin or Stalin orEngels,it is better, more radical, more appealing,and if you can quote Marx,especiallythe young Marx, it is more fascinatingforarecguard readership.In the inner-redguard debates, those who can quote Marx always got the upper hand, because mostdidn't know Marx at all well, and didn't know how to respond.

For Stalin, the most frequently quoted work is "Problems of Leninism."Alsothework,"On the Opposition". From Lenin, most frequently quoted were on Kautsky andthe second international.We didn't quote from criticisms of Trotsky by Stalin,becauseTrotsky was so radical it didn't seem to fit our purpose. But we didn't think veryclearly about what Trotsky was all about then.We mainly worked just with quotationsfrom Lenin, and so forth, not the original works. There was too much of it. Anothersource was Lu Xun.He was definitely more quoted than Stalin.In some ways,evenmore than Marx and Engels

So by this time there really were very few of the original baohuang pai in theschool,and not so many of the latter kind of baohuang pai either.Because the directionof the movement was clear by this point.If you were the most active,you were themost radical in our school.So 80-90% of the active students in the school were on ourside, the most radical. Only 10-20% were on the other side,the less radical ones,whichwe calledbaohuang pai.

Another development was the cross-danwei affiliation.There emerged twogreatalliances,and a divide between them.This occured in every locality.Each side was aunified alliance of small organizations under one banner.In Xuancheng, the two greatgeneral headquarters were the Geming zaofanpai zhihuibu, our side, and the Gemingzaofanpai zongbu,or zhihuibu vs. zongbu. Each side had all varieties of affiliated small

No.139

17organizations: workers,students,artists, actors, residents,peasants,low ranking cadres,office workers.FEach side claimed to have more than 5o% of the population.Each sidehad a very comprehensive system of communication, transport, material supply, finance,propaganda.Each side occupied half of the county town,like two different states,a veryclear sense of territory.The two big factions in Xuancheng were ideologically andorganizationally connected with the two big factions in Wuhu,and they in turn connectedto the two big factions in Hefei and other cities.So in entire Anhui province two greatdivisions,the haopaii or good faction,and the pipai (the pi from fart).The name comesfrom this. After the provincial authorities were denounced, Li Baohua,in early 1967,theradicals tried to seize power.They succeeded,but afterward they discovered that theformation of the power structure they didn't like.So a faction withdrew in protest,while they others stayed in power. So one side said this power seizure is good,the otherside said "haode pi",or its no good.So the pipai were more radical.They were not onlyagainst the old authoriites,but the new rebel government after the power seizure. I wasin the pipai.The pipai left the revolutionary alliance because they weren't given enoughseats. But there was a political issue as well, the other side wanted to keep a number ofolder officials on,but the pipai wanted to overthrow all of them.

These two big factions also established relations with their counterparts in otherplaces. like Shandong,Hebei, Shanghai,and even Beijing. Each side would reprintarticles in their papers from only their favored faction in other cities,and would onlyreprint the materials of one of the factions in Beijing. We would only distribute materialfrom Kuai Dafu's sansi organization (3rd headquarters).The di pai Beijing was moreradical than the tian pai, both were within the 3rd HQ. We wouldn't distribute anythingby the lst headquarters, or Nie Yuanzi's rump organization. But even within the 3rdheadquarters,we preferred di to tian.Therewas no such faction in Shanghai to allywith, since Wang Hongwen had already crushed it, but we did like the chai liansi, or theorganization of hardliners that held out for a while at the Diesel Engine Factory.

If you look at the major groups of each of the two large factions, by which I meanthe adults from workunits,you can see that on the zhihuibu side there are much lessmodel workers,party members,cyl members, fewer people from average cadre familybackground. In contrast, the zongbu had many more of the models of the preCR period,people from model factories and communes,model villages,party members and lowerranking party officials, pre CR activists at all levels. This was very clear.We knewbecause when the two sides used posters to attack one another,the zongbu side used thecharge that we had a lot of class enemies,rightists, rich peasants, etc.in ourorganization. Of course this was an exaggeration, but it indicated that the classbackground of our side was not so clear as the other side.We really didn't have a lot ofpeople from black categories,but we didn't have a lot from model backgrounds or thePLA,and so forth.When we attacked them, we called them runningdogsoftherevisionists,of Li Baohua;you are models of revisionism xiuzheng zhuyi yangban,or thatyou are small Khrushchev's,you are the bodyguards of Liu Shaoqi and the revisionistheadquarters.So it was generally known that this applied to the entire membership ofthese organizations.But it not really true that we had a lot of landlords and other oldclass enemies in our organization, just people who weren't models and who often did nothave truly red backgrounds.On our side there were more pre-CR troublemakers, peoplewho didn't ting hua. Before the CR,bu tinghua was equivalent to being a troublemakersomeone of low political consciousness who didn't stand closely with the party.On theradical side you could also find a lot of people with strong grievances about their

No.139

18treatment before the CR. Their workunit leaders had been unfair toward them,or hadgotten revenge on them for a criticism,or who were angry about corruption or nepotismin the factory,and so got in trouble with the unit leaders and got criticized and theircareers blocked because of this.When I heard these kinds of complaints from the adultsin our organization,I became uncomfortable. I had a vague sense telling me that theirmotivation for participating in the CR was different from mine. I took part because Iwas interested in lofty principles and ideals, the higher things. But whenm I listened tothe adults,they seemed to be taking just part because they had some personaladvantages before the CR.Their motivation was more material than idealistic.That'swhyI felt uncomfortable.When we were just among ourselves,we often discussed howthe motivations of the others were not pure,only the students motivations were pure.In fact,these are exactly the same words the students used in TAM square last yearabout the workers,and also exact words that the party and government used in trying totell the students that while their motivations were pure,theepeople in society at largewere not so pure and that the students could be manipulateddbypeoplewithbadmotivations; so their motivations are good but they don't understand the consequences.

I found itvery difficult to accept then that some people participated in the CRbecause of matters having to do with their own lives.I refused to realize this.Theacceptance of this fact would have been very embarrassing and humiliating for me;itwould have beenwrong for me to fight together for these people.And perhaps myactivities are being used, and I am being manipuated by these people. It also would havemeant that what older people told us at the beginning of the CR,be careful youridealism isn't used by bad people,was after all true.I began to feel now and then thatmaybewe aerbeingusedby some people and didn'trealize how complicated thatrevolution is. To fully face up to this though, would have negated our extreme radicalstand.Up to that point, we were brave enough to go beyond all limits and take greatrisks because,iin part, we felt that only we knew the real spirit of revolution,and onlywe could carry it thoughproperly.

We thought we had this higher wisdom,higher

Lproperly.insight,and this gave us powerfulLpsychologicall support to do the things we did.I oftentried to avoid listening to these peoplewhen they came back to complain about thesethings.I didn't want their complaints to;have an impact on me and polute my mind.Iwasworried that ifI listened Imightbecome motivated byself-interest.

In my school at this stage,red guard leaders in my faction, five of them,nonewere not the best students.One,a basketball player and senior,Duan Shuanglin,wasmy best friend during the Cultural Revolution. According to his classmates, he spentvery little time on learning and studying. He came from poor urban dweller family, alabel equivalent to lower middle peasant in rural areas(chengshi pinmin).But this isnot a red background, since it is a fairly complicated social position.It is averagechengfen.Another guy, Ji Yebao, came from low ranking rural party cadre family. Hewas a junior year student, was not a good student at all. Just wasn't that bright, didn'tread much,had awful handwriting, but he was very self-confident. The reason was thatin his village or hometown he was the only person who could enter this school, hisfather was a party member and official and he was poor peasant stock.Without the CRhe wouldn't have hadmuch of a future18givenhiss grades,he probably could have gottenintoa low level college likeagriculturallor8geological school. A third guy, Xu Xiong, wasa sophomore,came from a geological team background,father was a cadre in a geologicalteam.He was very radical from the very start, very energetic, self confident, goodputonghua (very few people in Xuancheng spoke good putonghua), so he was good in19

No.139debate and was leadership material. But when his father was criticized in his unit, notheavily, really, he immediately stopped speaking out so loudly in public meetings.Thenlater his father was labelled a pantu, or traitor,the worst of the bad labels.When thishappened his style totally changed,he became so depressed,his whole appearance andaction changed fundamentally.The other side criticized us for having a pantu gouzhaiziin our organization.In the public debates, Xu Xiong normally loved debating, ran to thefront and enjoyed it. But now, with his father's political tragedy, he stayed in the backof our group,and didn't speak out.He felt now he was a son of a traitor, its not hisplace to go to the front.It was so painful for him,and of course we had to ask him tostep down from the leadership,even though he refused to quite and he still said he wasstill a true radical and follower of Chairman Mao,no matter what happened to hisfather. But his disgrace caused so much damage to our organization, we had no choiceeven though we trusted him still.The pressures came from the members of ourorganization, not from the leaders who were his friends. He was just an average studentacademically.

A fourth leader,Bai Zimin,was not actually a formal leader like the above three.Bai was only in the first year of junior high,but was very big and strong, and couldspeak only broken Chinese. But he was very stubborn. Academically, he was a nobodyHis chance of getting into the senior school was no better than 50%. It was very likelythat he would have gone back to his village after junior high, I suspect, if not for theCR. A fifth leader, Shang Chaoliu,was a junior and the best academically of this bunch.His father had long ago died and he had been living with his older sister and herhusband.The husband was party secretary of a commune.Shangwasa leaderonlyfora short period,only because he was academically superior. All his ideas were based onwhat he had read,and were often unrealistic. He was not really a man of action andwas really quite moderate, so he was pushed aside as being too moderate.

So mmyyimpression is that in the leadership,by which I mean both electedleaders and the backbone elements,or core elements,unelectedl--the latter were reallymore radical and crucial in pushing things forward--the better students were not theformally elected ones,but the core elements.The core elements at this stage were thosewho were relied on to write, argue, debate, so they needed the better students in theseposts. Later on when warfare began fighting prowess became an additional characteristicof the core elements. In the school, two people were considered to be the best inpropaganda, Wang Jingfu, from a poor urban dweller background. He loved literatureand especially the kind of things written by Lu Xun.He was very fast in writingcommentaries and essays. He was definitely university material,and in fact years laterdid become one of the first to enter university among all of us redguards.He was a1970 gongnongbing student. He was good academically but also very clever.That's whyhe had good connections with the commune leadership and got sent to the university.Iwas also considered among the best in terms of propaganda,by the end of the CR peoplewere thinking I was number 1 and he was number 2.Most of the things publishedunder the name of our organization were published either by him or me,during the 21/2 years that we were active. (We weren't disbanded until summer 1968). Another guy,Liu Jun,was also a core element. His parents joined revolution before the war,andserved in the New Fourth Army and father was wounded.So in terms of politicalbackgorund, he was the best. He was very smart,was good in making radio receivers;was very good in physics.Before the CR,you had to buy some of the radio parts withyour own money, and some was provided by the school and the time to use it limited.20

No.139At this stage of the CR our group became the masters of the school, and he and I tookthe keys from the guy who was in charge of the building, and he set up in four rooms abigshopofor making broadcasting and radio receivers from the parts there.He had a lotof people working under him there. He was like Einstein, absent minded,and devotedall of his energies and time for making these things that were so crucial in competitionwith other groups in propaganda. He was later engaged in making bombs from scratchwhen the open warfare broke out.He stopped making radios and started makingweapons:cannon,nitroglycerine.Once we were mixing nitroglycerine together and itblew up on us, and I got a very painful burn on my hand. After that I stayed awayfrom him. Later he made a radio controlled airplace and hung a time bomb from it.While he was making it,the bomb exploded and he lost four fingers on his left handand his face was disfigured. At the end of the CR he was put in jail because he made abroadcasting radio and was called a spy trying to send out messages to the enemies.

So core elements began such by virtue of their personal qualities,whereas theformal leaders were often people who were popular,could compromise.Theydidn'tnecessarily have to be those with thebest academics.There were also people who weremost radical earlyyon in speaking out,daring to hold the teacher's hands behind his backduring a struggle session, theyoften droppedoutoftheleadershiplateron infavorofpeople who knew more about personnel, by which is meant personal relations, also thosewho were more mature and could listen to criticism from other red guards

The head of the zhihuibu in the city of Xuancheng was Wu Tianzhu, adiscontented cadre who had been a lower ranking official in the handicraftsadministration bureau of the county.He was about 36-38 when the CR began,a smartman,he had trouble with his boss before the CR. Probably it came during the 4 cleansmovement; he probably criticized his boss and the boss got vengeance on him, so it cameout in the CR. So he was a target for criticism at the outset of the CR. So he endedup being the first person to speak out against his boss in the CR. So his reputation wasestablished. He was good in debating and speaking. At this point in the CR theworkers were not that important,they became more important when the armed warfarebegan.

Another guy, named Xiao, one of the top leaders in zhihuibu, was man of strategy,was rumored he had 1 or 2years of university but was kicked out for some reason.Hewas a graduate of a techinical middle school in Hefei.So locally he was consideredsomething. He was a technician in Xuancheng bureau of electrical power. He had bigtrouble with his unit leader before the CR,though I don't know the real reasons. So hewas defined as a bad element at the beginning of the CR. I saw him being paradedthrough the streets to a struggle meeting,with a hat on and a placard around his neckbeing pushed roughly toward the struggleesession.This later became evidence of hisanti-leadership stand earlyon and he becamea leaderbecauseof this.

A third leader, a Xie,was a low ranking cadre in some bureau, I can't remember.He also had trouble in the four cleans.This was a very sophisticated man who onsurface was very hamble and caring toward comrades,very cautious. So he became theNo.2 leader in the citywide organization.So at this point the 3 most important leaderson our side were ordinary cadres.Student Red Guard Activities （6/14/90,2 hrs.)

During the first half of 1967, the political activities of the student red guardschanged completely.Before the turn to activities outside of the school,there was a lot of21

No. 139activities inside the school.Red guards concentrated on teachers and party officials inthe school.But when red guards developed organizational links with nonstudentrebelswhen the society as a whole was divided into two large factions,the interests shifted toissues outside the school. This took place early 1967.

During this half year,very few redguards were interested in organizing strugglemeetings within the school.The so called black teachers were almost totally ignoredduring this stage.They may be doing some manual work building roads or cleaningtoilets or dining rooms, but that was about all the punishment they got. Red guards hadalmost no interest in getting confessions out of the black teachers.

Before the beginning of 1967, the red guard activities, probably 2/3 are schoolrelated.The targets were mostly school personnel,according to the official definition ofthe central authorities.Every unit's redguards and rebels were required to concentrateactivities within the danwei, and to investigate the bad people in the units,resolve allproblems within the danwei before you go outside. Because if you don't clean up yourdanwei, nobody knows who is the good guy, who is the capitalist roader. You could notjust let them escape.

Beginning late 1966, when the outward tendency began to develop,the centralauthoritiesalreadybegan to remind thered guards that they shouldn't think that the jobis completely done in the unit. They told them to search all the dead angles (sijiao) inthe unit. In spite of these repeated directives and suggestions, the redguardsbecameless and less interested in these dead tigers.They weren't interesting,nothing novelabout it. The black teachers, all those with bad political backgrounds, or people withforeign ideas promoted in classroom, or had trouble in previous political campaigns, orvery bad family backgrounds.I can't recall that any teacher was beaten in our school.Students just forgot about them.But the school principle was still under pressure as acapitalist roader. His personal background was more interesting, very complicated.

Wang Long was our principal aand party secretary.he joined revolution in 1937and went to Yenan.When he arrived there,heegotintopoliticaltroubleintherectification campaign of 1942.He was tortured severely because before he went toYenan from his home province of Shanxi,he worked as a low ranking official in YanXishan's army. He was political director of a small unit in his army.hewasbeatenandforced to confess,and he was imprisoned.He had education equivalent to senior highschool, pretty good for his generation. Right after 1949, he was a county party secretaryof Hexian,near Ma'anshan. But he was demoted for repeated extramarital affairs. Thenhe was sent to our school. His official rank in early 1950s was 13, but he was 15 whenhe was sent to us.He was a typical tu huangdi. He was very rough and assertive,scared people.This is why the red guards still had an interest in punishing him becausehis case was so interesting.He knew Jiang Qing in Yenan and said she was one of themost beautiful women there,everybodywanted tohave her,but when they found outMao liked her they laid off. He said he had once seen Jiang Qing's legs and they werereally nice.

During the CR Wang Long was beaten,I did see him getting beaten.He was themost mistreated person in the unit.Many people hated him because of his leadershipstyle.A second person was a teacher named Li Xiaochang.In 1952, he was second inthepartyhierarchyin theschool.Butin 1954,theydiscovered that hehad a badpolitical background, he was some sort of spy. He came from very rich Shanghai family,and at age 16,in late 1940s,he got to know many important military, political andbusinessmen in Shanghai. In 1948, it was discovered that he secretly went to Taiwan,

No. 139

22and then came back to the mainland quickly. According to his own admission,he wasassigned to go to Taiwan by the underground party organization. But all the individualshe mentioned for proof couldn't verify his story. This guy had a lot of love affairs too.He was very handsome, had a lot of style, was more cosmopolitan. So he developed loverelationships with three of the most beautiful girls in the school.The last one hemarried,a gymnast who was really beautiful. He was abused physically, pushed to theground, in the struggle meeting. It was mainly rough handling, not actual beating andtorture though.There was sometimes pretense of rough handling for show, but not inthe cases of these two men.Wang Long got the worst treatment. For a couple of weekshe couldn't walk,he was beaten so badly.

I was personally involved in the interrogation of both these men.I never had thecourage to beat them physically.I was frightened by the possible consequences later on.Also,I thought that the CR was a revolution to touch men's soul,not their body. Tobeat people contravened directives of CR.Some red guards were very interested insearching people's homes; they took some valuable items away for themselves.Aminority,not many.At this point the corruption amongthe red guards was still veryminor. But later on the red guards became very corrupt, I'll talk about this later. WangLong had good calligraphy collection in his home; some of the red guards wanted hiscalligraphy.This was the onlytthingthatWangLongreallywanted to keep,buthedidn't dare say this to the red guards.I could tell by looking at him,and felt a littlesympathy for him because I liked calligraphy too.I convinced the others to keep thecalligraphy and not destroy it,later they turned it all over to me and I later returnedthem to Wang Long. Because of this we later became friends after 1968--this was whenhe told me the stories about Jiang Qing.

Two types of students were most involved in beating the victims. First were thebig athletic students, second were people who were academically poor.The good studentsdid not take very active part in beatings. The leader who was a basketball player, Duan,liked to beat people, also the guy whose father was in a geological team, and the guywhose father was a commune secretary also liked to beat people.

Most beatings tookplace in the struggle meetings.So many people are there at the meetings,ifyou beatthe people too hard, you can get criticized by other red guards. There was slapping,pushing to the ground,etc.That was the most common practice.But in my school Inever saw anyone beaten to the point of bleeding, unconsciousness, or physical injury.Wang Long couldn't walk for several weeks because the duration of time he stood therebent over with a heavy placard around his neck was too long. Students really lovedasking him questions about his love affairs.

There were two main reasons for such struggle meetings. First,to fulfill yourduty tosearchout capitalist roadersand showyou had correct orientation.SSecond,forfun, sometimes we did it because there wasn't enough action.The first few strugglesessions and interrogations were done by the core leaders of the red guards, but theywould get bored with it and later they would let the o;rdinary red1guards do it;theythought it was more fun.

There were other within-school activities,not really sanctioned by the authorities.We opened the school library by force and took whatever books we wanted,and we tookthem home. So the school library was literally cleaned out. Purpose was to getsomething to read; this was done under cover of destroying bourgeois,feudal,and foreignheritage. In reality we were looking for interesting reading.One guy took aboutWhitman, Shakespeare, Yeats, Tagore.Mostly the books left over, often put in trash,23

No.139were philosophy, history, political theory. That is what I ended up reading; I likedastronomy but you need a teacher to understand this.This was the beginning of myinterest in Marxism.I got a history of philosophy put out by the Soviet Academy ofSciences. Several volumes of Lenin,Stalin,Lu Xun,Diderot. Neibu books were not inour library,they were in the county propaganda department.Not even our teacherscould read them,onlyWang Long. In 1970,when I was appointed to be a low rankingperson in a county revolutionary committee,I started to get access to these other kindsofbooks.It wasthereI readtheYugoslavs,Bernstein,Kautsky,Khrushchey.

Interest gradually shifted to matters outside of the school.There was plenty todo outside; the school itself was getting boring. First,to get more and more equipmentThe school budget was limited,its not a production unit.About all you coulddgetwaspaper, pen and ink. But we needed things like large silk flags, higher-quality armbands,transportation (sanlun che),horns, drums and gongs for meetings, cash. So weconcentrated on higher ranking officials;to force them to confess,to search their homes,to investigate them and get them to write confessions was much more interesting.inMarchorApril1967wedidathoroughinvestigationofpeopleinthecountycadrescompound, a beautiful building put up by Spanish missionaries long ago.We were veryinterested in this beautiful place,which before we had no chance to enter.So we wereinterested and did a thorough investigation of it.But we were pretty disappointed,wecouldn't find much interesting stuff in the offices. But we went up into an old attic thathad probably not been open since 1949; we found a lot of crosses, robes, bibles. We alsofound a dead shriveled up baby's body,wrapped up in cloth.

There was also a lot of factional competition.Debates.After shift from withinschool to outside school, there was another shift from capitalist roaders and blackteachers to struggle with the other red guard faction.People were fascinated withfactionalstruggle.Wemadealotofcolorfulandelaborateaccusationsagainstoneanother.This was very interesting and became increasingly important.Bymid-1967some 70-80 poercent of our energies were invested in factional fighting.Notyetviolentnot yet armed. But roots of this began at this time.People began to carry knives withthem to the great outdoor debates during this time.The debates were attended bythousands and went on for many hours, sometimes all night long. The factions wouldfight for the best place for their wallposters and broadcasting stations.Wewouldteardown one anothers'posters.At this point,the factional fightingitself became moreimportant than any substantive issues.The Movement July-December 19671（6120/90,3h5.

Two main trends.The redguards and rebels begin to attack militaryestablishments. The factionalism among red guards and rebels turned violent and usedarms.

Beginning of June,red guards in Xuancheng got some material from big cities likeChengdu,Wuhan,Zhengzhou.This material carried a new message:the CR now faces avery dangerous, powerful enemy. Not in the party, not in the government, and not inthe society,but in the army,in the secret institution.The first important speech aboutthe danger in the army was given by Jiang Qing. She used the term dai qiang de LiuDeng luxian".Before this point, the target ws the Liu and Deng line in the civilianorganizations,now the target would be the military.

When we first got this message, we were shocked. The reason was that the armyhad been an institution admired and prized by Mao himself, Jiang Qing, Chen Boda and24

No. 139otahear CR radical leaders.Also worshippped by the red guards.If you look at thefashion among red guards,you can sense in a vivid way how much respect and worshipthe red guardshad for PLA.We redguardss dressed in army uniforms and had armyhats.The older the type of uniform you have, the better, more prestigious it was.Olderones had insignia of rank,some yellow trim,more form fitting.Thebleachedoutcolorwas more fashionable too.If you wore an old uniform it meant that someone in yourfamily had been in the army early on,which indicated honorable status for your family.

Now we are suddenly told that the revisionist line in the army is more dangerousthan among civilians.We were shocked, but also excited. For over the last half year, allthe enemies had been attacked and criticized many times.There was nothing new,nothinguntouched or unchallenged.So the process of struggle meetings and criticismsbecame more routinized,less interesting,less exciting and stimulating for the red guards.We took people to struggle meetings more for form than content, just to show that ourorientation was correct,because that was what we were supposed to do.

Now we immediately faced a new enemy.We had never fought them before,never had the chance. Since the enemies were armed,this means the fight would bemore dangerous and more stimulating. So the red guards were excited.

Since late 1966 early 1967,wherever the red guards turned,there were simplynoforbidden areas.Whoever you wanted to attack,there were no prohibitions.Nowhereyou go would you be stopped--except the army.The military establishment was the onlyforbidden area.When we heard Jiang Qing talk about the most dangerous and cunningenemies being in the army, psychologicallyythis was newfor us,but intellectually andpolitically,the red guardswerequite ready to accept thispoint ofview.Our experiencehad taught us that in many localities,when you investigatehigh ranking party officialsmanyy lines of connection go to the army.When the investigationbeginssto touch uponsomething related to the army,it reached a dead end.Manyhighh ranking party officialswere of course former political comissars in the army.So many of them would run tomilitary bases after they were attacked to hide from the red guards.They would only beturned over the the red guards if the upper levels ordered them turned over.All theseexperiences and evidence now came together, and we now found some underlying thingto explain all of this.

In July there was the Wuhan incident.Local rebels and red guards attackedChen Zaidao,who was chief commander of Wuhan military district and centralcommittee,military affairs commission. When Wuhan had its conflict between rebels andthe army,the provinces around Hubei had similar conflicts. These events went hand inhand with another trend.The increase in the factionalism among red guards and rebels.There were I think 3 reasons for intensified factionalism.FFirst,after the ShanghaiJanuary Revolution,which set up a new model of power seizure and new structure oflocal government, the 3-in-1 principle, and Mao in national papers and radio sent out anationwide call for rebels to unite and seize power from all capitalist roaders and form

In the 3-in-1 principle,one wasrevol;utionary committees in every province and city.military representatives,one from revolutionary cadres,one from united massorganizations.Among the 3,only the delegates from the army were out of our reach, wecouldn't influence who the military representatives would be.But the other two types ofdelegates we could influence and bargain over.

For example,on the provincial level,there are 15 cadres.Some are more favoredby one faction, some by another. Some due to family or personal relations have morecontact with one faction.Some cadres politically would favor one faction over another.25

No.139To putwho into what position made a big difference. And the criteria to choose"revolutionary" cadres was very vague. It was supposed to mean that they had honestlybeen tranformed by the experience of the CR, and now honestly supported Mao's policies.But how can you measure it? There was no objective standard.Now the informal andpersonal yardstick became more important in selection.

Selecting delegates from mass organizations caused even more conflicts.If yousay in one county or city that 4 seats are reserved for mass delegates, and the posts arenot all equal.From which organization to select people for different posts caused a lotofdistrust,envy,dispute,anxiety among rebels and red guards.So this was a universalphenomenoneverywhere.When the power seizure began,there occurred more and morefightingbetween factions thanbetween theradicalsandthe old officials.

I could sense how bitter was the factional conflict between red guard organizationsonce there occurred theopportunity to enter into the power structure.Except fora veryfew individuals, the great majority of red guards and rebels had no thought of enteringinto institutionsofpower tobeleaders.They were rebels,wanted to attack thegovernment,they weren'ttprepared to become leaders.When the opportunity arose,itcreated a very complicated set of conflicts among the mass organizations who had achance to gain a share in the power structure.

The so calledlgreatalliancewas a veryimportant policyredirection fromChairman Mao. He sensed very well that all these rebel organizations were fragmentedand divided against one another.If the side of the revolutionaries, the side of the peopleare so disorganized,how can you seize power from the revisionists,the capitalist roaders.So Mao called upon us to stop fighting with one another and establish a great alliancebefore seizing power. You could not seize power until you united. But in fact the powerseizure itself caused more conflict and factional fighting that before.

A second reason is that since the whole society was everywhere divided into twobig factions, each side had all kinds of people in them,all ages,occupations, work units.Class background probably was not the same. During theperiodwhenthereweretwogreat factions, one society divided into two. The territory of Xuancheng was divided intoareas for each faction.The membership of each faction became very complicated.Onevery issue, each faction grew more out of control, couldn't decide which issues were themost important. The only thing that they were sure of is that whatever the other sideis for,we are against.So if side A is for cadre Liu,if they find out that he has contactswith side B, they might decide to be against him.

The third reason was psychological. The accumulation of distrust, hatred,suspicion of the other faction.In the beginning,when the two great factions came intoexistence, people could still get together and talk about things other than the CR. Thetwo factions could still talk. But over time, the relations worsened, pushing and shovingwould take place.Then some would start to use knives, spears and clubs and organizefighting groups.When armed conflict broke out in the big cities, the story spread veryquickly and was of course exaggerated as it was passed on.E.g. if 5 people are killed inthe fighting,by the time the story gets 200 miles away,there will be 20 dead.Whenviolence was involved,it was only naturally to get arms to protect yourself.The firstkind of weapon would be to get knives and things from home.Then they would turn tofactories in their territory and order them to makearms from their material.Workerswent back to their factories tomake weapons for their faction.Each side had a materialbase and stable resources for fighting.

After the self-made equipment stage, each side began to search for real guns, first26

No.139from the militias. When the two sides began to arm themselves, a big change occurred.The less radical side had better connections with the old cadres,and the pre-CRnetworks.All the military equipment was controlled by the old network,the old militias.And themilitias were controlled previously by the olddparty network.The more radicalside had fewer connections with the old network,so theyhad to seize weapons.But themore conservative side would actually be given the weapons, or be allowed to "seize"them.Theyalreadyhada secretdealwiththelocalmilitiastobeallowedtocartoff theguns; they were told where the materiel were stored. So all their actions succeeded.But the rebels would often come up empty handed,or would get guns with piecesmissing, or no ammunition.

So the more the radical side was disadvantaged in this process, the more radicaland violent they became in getting their weapons,because they felt they could only getweapons by force.They felt theywere gettingmoreand more insecure.Everydaytheywould hear that the other sidewas getting all kinds ofweapons.

So all three of these things were going on at the same time, and this is what ledto the increasingly violent factional struggle in Xuancheng.During this period a kind ofmilitaryintelligence servicegrewupamong thefactionsto spyon the others,detailtheirarmsand plans.We developed secret networks of spies and informers.We were gettinginformation back and this information caused us to react.

In July we were informed that there was a province wide conspiracy among allthe baohuang pai in Anhui, to prepare a bloody attack on the radicals. The purpose ofthe attack was to clean out all the radicals. We got the information from Wuhu,andthey probably got it from Hefei. At this moment our side had very few guns, maybe tenortwenty..According to the report,the other side had hundreds or even thousands.Sowe had an urgent meeting.Since we could not confront the other side militarily,we hadto send a small number ofcorepeopletoa safe place.Ifarmed fighting takes place inXuancheng, this way we still would have people to come back, reorganize, and continuethe revolution.It was at this point, when the armed conflicts began,that we began toget more interested in the province wide counterrevolutionary conspiracy.

Now we felt we reallyweregettinga taste ofcounterrevolution,andthatwereally were tasting the reality of class struggle.We got more and more excited, felt moreand more that we were laying down our lives for a lofty course. We were encouraged bythe danger and by the relative weakness of our organization.We had read all the timethat all revolutions had begun with a small minority of weak revolutionaries,who wouldeventually fight on and on to victory. Russia, China, America, even ancient Rome, allhad the same kind of revolution.Now we felt that we were lucky to be involved in oneourselves.I could tell when we had meetings that others had read a lot of revolutionarystories from historical novels or histories that we had read.Everybody would quote fromMarx, Robespierre and Danton,other stories. So I think we were influenced by all thestories we read earlier.

So we chose about 20-30 people for temporary sanctuary, and I was one of them.We went to Nanjing, since nowhere in Anhui would be safe for us. In Jiangsu province,they also had two big factions, but strangely both factions supported the pi faction, ours.So we felt safe there..At midnight one night in late July we went by truck secretly toNanjing. On the road, we met groups from others cities and counties who were doingthe same thing

In Nanjing, we stayed at the Nanjing hangkong xueyuan. I was told by redguards there that they were trying to break into thw warehouse in which the airplanes27

No.139were stored.They were trying to get airplanes for their struggle.ZZhou Enlaihad sentseveral directives sayig that noone was allowed to take airplanes. And the PLA wouldguard the hangars. If you dared to break in, the PLA would use any means to deal withyou.Even so,theywerestill talkingaboutgetting at the planes.Wewerealso toldthat the red guards there were making time bombs, guided missles and other fancyweapons for themselves.Theyhad a comprehensive strategy whereby all communicationsand public services would be taken over in a military action, full scale warfare.Theyeven prepared to destroy the bridges around Nanjing in case of an emergency.

In Nanjing I witnessed two battles.One at the railway station.Severalthousands of workers had their hardhats on, carried steel pikes.They beat each other.I didn't see any deaths, but plenty of injuries. There seemed to be a gentlemmen'sagreement between the two sides.They didn't strike at the head,only at the body. Andthe battle was very short,less than ten minutes, stopped by the armybecauseitthreatened to disrupt the train station.The second battle was much smaller,at thecampus next to the aeronautics institute.A technical school,all the students werefighting each other.I crossed the wall and watched from about 50 meters away.Oneside occupiedathreestoreybuilding,theothersideattempted totakeitover.Atthisstageethe fightingwasnotwith guns but with clubs and axes.If you were wounded, theother side would stop attacking you. It as violent but still somewhat civilized. Theattackers used firefighting equipment to get up on the third floor. So I got the ideawhen we got back toXuanchengwe should raid the firestations for their equipmentThe attackers won, they took over the building,and allowed to losers to go back to theirdorms.

While in Nanjing we also had secret meetings and agreements with the factions inJiangsu about the kindsofhelpwecould get from them if wewere to lose in Anhui.We discussed various forms of cooperation.While in Nanjing also we surrounded XuShiyou's headquarters in Nanjing..We demanded that the Nanjing military districtsupport the radical rebels now in danger in Anhui,and that only they had the power toreverse the imbalance,and that PLA should support the leftists.We demanded that Xuand Du Ping, the political comissar, come out and meet us. In 2 1/2 days, of course, noone of their rank came out to meet us,and of course we couldn't get in.But eventuallya staff member came out, told us that Xu and Du were very busy because they wereresponsible for facing Taiwan andguarding the socialistmotherland.So the comradesare spending all their time on military duties,so you should not disturb national defenseand send your demands through me. It was later reported that Xu Shiyou was veryangry at our surrounding of his headquarters,and considered using military force againstus. He had a reputation as a very hard and fierce man. He had asked for permission todo this from Beijing was was reportedly refused. So we left without getting anything.

When we got back to Xuancheng, we had decided that we shoulddgotothearmyfor weapons, since they had better weapons than the militias. We collected inf;ormationon military arms depots and how they were guarded.We chose 3 targets.One was anunderground weapons depot about 20 km from Xuancheng in the mountains.We got theinformation from the people who lived out there.We were told that this depot wasdirectly under the Nanjing military district headquarters;it was so important that thecommander was a colonel.But two km from the entrance,they had electrified fence,andsince it was a military warehouse,the army had the right to shoot you if you attacked it.So we decided against the target

In collecting this intelligence we operated just like a guerilla unit. Our people28

No.139disguised themselves as peasant who were delivering food to the base and observed thesituation in disguise.

The second target was a military base close to an important prison,where DingLing had been held,and later Huang Yungsheng.But we decided against this becausewe might allow the counterrevolutionaries in the prison to escape.

The third target was next to Xuancheng middle school. Among the 3, this wasthe smallest, but seemed safer to attack. Some children of the officials in this unitattended local schools,and since it was located in the town,it was more connected withthe local people.So the securitythere was not so strict.We knew that the best time toattackwouldbe in the earlymorning when the soldiers had just gotten up, were washingand eating, and the watches were changing. We decided to attack here, about 1000 redguards and workers.Our leaders put us student red guards in the front,because theythought themilitarywaslesslikely toattackusthan the workers and olderrebels.

I joined the action.I was very stupid. Before joining, I was given a big GermanWW2 era handgun from weapons gotten from the militia. I carried the handgun withme.I rushed forward and was at the very front.We knew what rooms to go to to getthe guns. A thousand of us jumped the wall and rushed in, all shouting slogans andwaving Mao's red book.The soldiers were dumbfounded. I got two new handguns ofSoviet design.Our people pushed their way into the room trying toget guns,but Icould have gotten crushed. Since I was one of the first in, I was one of the first to tryto leave.By that time the soldiers were prepared.Two soldiers catched me and askedme what I did.They asked what I did, and I said nothing.SSo they picked me up andfound the 3 guns, and took all three. I was so angry and upset, but I couldn't fight withthese two big guys.But a lot of us got weapons out; we got handguns, AK 47s;, heavymachine guns and an anti-aircraft gun. Since the latter was missing a piece, we used ittodecoratetheentrancetoourschooltofrightenourenemies.

After we got weapons,some tragedies started to happen.

Therewasa14yearold named Jin.He didn't know his gun was loaded,accidentally killed a 6 year old kidand was put in jail. There were many incidents of this kind because the students didn'tknow how to handle guns.

From this time on,the CR became totally military warfare.From aboutSeptemberuntil Mayor June of 1968.Workers and Students

During this period,the division of labo;r within factions was decided mainly bymilitary considerations.Up to this point, workers had played a minor role in the bigfactional organizations.The workers had served as numbers to fill up big rallies andhold up flags and yell slogans in disciplined way. But when the armed fighting began,the workers became the major part..And the worker leaders became more important.

So beginning in June, all the factions were organized into two sections, wengong,or attack with words,and wuwei,or defend with arms.Came from a formulationofJiang Qing.Attack with words and defend with arms.I was a member of the attackwith words section,and the defend with arms section was filled with workers,many ofwhom had military training,and the bigger students,often athletes.Up to this point,the people who were most looked up to were those who could give speeches and writeessays.But now those with physical strength and fighting ability were the ones mostadmired.In our big faction,the military duties were carried out mainly by dockworkers.Dockworkers were mostly not state employees,they were jiti.They were paid only when29

No.139they worked,by the piece.Poor benefits,most were illiterate,but the pay was prettyhigh because the work so hard.In bigger cities this work was often mechanized and thebenefits were better.But in small counties people moved things by hand or by handcart.These men were very strong but very simple. Even at the time I felt bad for these men,because they really didn't understand all of what was going on.Clearly, they were beingused as tools byothers.

Traditionally the dockworkers were very solidary.Each area controlled its ownopportunities and protected their own turf. They were used to fighting for turf, andoften were harrased by policemen and criminals in the old China.So dockworkers had avery strong sense of self-defence and mutual loyalty. The dockers joined our side insteadof the other side may possibly be because of their poor social position,but I can't reallysay for sure.FBut the direct reason was that their leader joined us and they were loyaltohim.They had a simple way of selecting leaders.The guy whowas the strongestbecame the leader.So their leader joined,named Yang,and all his people joined too.And they took orders from nobody except their leader.They were very disciplined andfollowed their leader without questioning.Most of those killed in a year's fighting weredockers in our organization.The scenes when we brought their bodies back,and theirrelatives fell all over their corpses weeping, was really pitiful. The state wouldn't takecare oftheir families,since they had no insurance.

Our dockers were very brave fighters.The main fighters on the other side wereconstruction workers,and their situation was similar.You are paid if you work,noinsurance and other benefits. No work or sick, no pay. Though when you worked, thepay was high. Injuries, no benefits. So their economic situation was about the same soyou can't say that economic situation determined which faction you would join.Theconstruction workers were very violent,less disciplined than the dockers.On their side,the most important worker leader, named Mao, a very strong and rough guy. Whenfighting began, Yang and Mao became two of the most important leaders of the twofactions. Before this,we didn't have much respect for workers,but when they began tofight and die for us, we began to respect them a lot. I asked them often what they werefighting for,and they always just said "for the revolution".I don't think they reallyknew. From economic point of view, the construction workers and dockers should haveunited,but in fact they mainly fought one another.

Among workers from other industries,generally speaking the better the educationof the worker,and the better the social welfare benefits,the less active the workers werein the fighting. For example, my stepfather worked for the electric power company,where the benefits were great,and the workers there participated in everything but thefighting. Workers in the better factories were reluctant to join the fighting. This wasalso true for the other side as well.

In Xuancheng, some workers did raise material demands in late 1966 after theysaw materials from other cities.This was a nationwide movement.Two kinds ofworkers organized and raised demands then:temporary workers and workers laid offfrom 1962 on who had been hired first in the Great LeapForward.From about October1966 to January or so 1967,these workers continually demanded a change in theiremployment status.They were the most organized national group.These in fact werethe first people to send a delegation to Beijing to lodge their grievances.In thebeginning, we were very sympathetic to them,because they said they were the victims ofLiu's revisionist line. But then immediately Zhou Enlai and Jiang Qing declared theirdemands illegitimate,and their nationwide organizations were counterrevolutionary.But30

No.139we didn't really understand why they were suppressed, it seemed they had a justifiedgrievance.Workers'Role,Continued（6/27/90,3hrs.)

One thing I wondered about during the fighting was how these workers couldmake their livelihood when they were fighting all day.These kinds of workers didn'tmake a wage unless they came to work normally.The entire county at this time wasdivided into two zones,controlled by the big factions.In these zones, the state sectorworkers still continued to get their salaries,even if they weren't there on payday theycould have someone pick up their envelope for them..But the collective and handicraftindustries did not give you your wage bill no matter what. If you don't turn over yourprofit to the state on time they bank won't give you money for the wages.This questiontroubled me because for our sidethe mainmilitary forcewasmade upof dockworkers,and the other side,construction workers.These were collective sectors, so both sideswere relying exclusively on collective sector workers for fighting. How did they get theirmoney? I don't know,but there must have been some arrangement because otherwisethey wouldn't have been able to keep on.We had four or five banks in Xuancheng, butafter a shortwhile they were all taken over by the military.Right after the bank officeworkers started to take part in the movement, the army moved in immediately.1Laterthere was a central document that required all bank workers to stay away from the CR,and not participate in either of the large factions in society.But it didn't work,becuasesome employees still participated,though not very actively. In Huainan,Wuhu and someotherplaces red1guards broke into banks and took away money.After that theyprotected the banks.

From mid-1967 to spring 1968, all the regular businesses ceased to function inXuancheng.Lotsofworkers just lived in their factory compounds in this period,or inbuildings they had taken over, and got free food and other things. Still,they had tohave cash,and I don't know where the money came from.Inoticed that rebels fromunits that had better finances in fact donated more money to the factions at the highpoint of the fighting.The ones that were financially poorer donated less money,andsent more people to engage in fighting. Among the red rebels,there was anunderstanding that the people from the better off unitswere unwilling to go to the frontlines to shoot.So others in the faction looked down on them.But this wascounterbalanced by the fact that everyone knew they were donating more money.So westill relied on them for funds.It was also said in wallposters put up byboth sides thatworkers in collective enterprises were illegallyusingctthegongji jin to reinvest inproduction.And the rebels were also using the gongii jin for their movement activities.At this point the leaders had stood aside,and the rebels controlled the units. The rebelsran the workunits themselves. But they did abuse their power, though in a limited way.They knew that the violation of financial regulations could result in serious punishmentslater on.Roleof Student Red Guards in theCitywide Alliance

To understand the role of the redguards, we have to understand the conspiracytheory.One theory played a very big role throughout the CR: this theory of conspiracy.In the party and government establishment there has been a secret network, and manyofficials who on the surface obeyed chairman Mao and worked for the people,in realityopposed Mao and worked against the people. According to this theory, the network of

No.139

31enemies was not limilted to the party itself; it spread also out into society in a quiet andhidden way.We used this theory to guide most of our actions.Of all the centralleaders, Jiang Qing used this theory most of all.I read virtually all of her speechesduring the CR; and she used this theory in a very impressive way. She always told thestudents that they should never be misled by the appearance of any official or person insociety.The conspiracy could have been there for many years without you being able to;see it.Chairman Mao asked you red guards to make revolution by yourself because hewants you to understand the complexity of class struggle and gain experience inunderstanding the secret enemies.Maoalreadyyknows the enemies at the top.But ifMao just tells you,you will not get any revolutionary experience.

Sofromthistheorytheredeveloped

policy::regardless of what terrible thingsthe red guards have done,the red guardsthemselves are not responsible,only thecunning secret enemies, the black hands and manipulators are responsible. If there isviolence between factions,or bank robberies,or disruption of public transport,or raidingmilitary bases for weapons,the common practice was to hold the red guards innocentbecause of their youth, inexperience, and political zeal. Their intentions are always good.Then why did they make all these bad mistakes?There are manipulators behind thescenes, or they are being mislead by black hands. This theory was repeated from time intime in.all of the provinces.When I read speeches by JiangQing,Kang Sheng,and QiBenyu when they met with students who had come from provinceswhere terrible thingshad happened,you could alwasy hear one of them talking about the pervasiveness ofconspiracy.

This conspiracy was so influential on us radical young red guards. We began tolook at people, to judge them, not by their appearance or deeds or words or classbackgrounds, political status, because all of these things are phenomenal, not the essence.The essence is something secret and unknown,unaccessible to you, something you cannever see or feel.So we red guards became very suspicious of any;body and everybody

Withoutthis theory,the redguardswould notbesointerested in do;ing allthethings they did.The conspiracytheory first destroyeddpeople's common sense,itdestroyed their empirical mentality.It destroyed trust among people and within thecommunity.Otherwise,they would not have done all these terrible things to oneanother.The conspiracytheory was responsible for this;it undermined the basis o;fdecency between people.It was crucial that red guards were more and more encouragedbyolderpeopleewithin their factions to do terrible things.For example,if the largerfaction has designed an attack on a military unit to seize weapons,who should go first?Who should break the gate,and who should surround the guards,break the locks？ Theolderpeopleewould tell theredguards that this is what they were to do,becausewhatever redd guards do,they can always be excused for their youth and good intentions.But if older people do such things,they can always be accused of evil intentions.

So red guards were encouraged or assigned to do two kinds of things by the bigalliances.First, a lot of terrible or violent things that were against the law.Likeattacking the bank,raiding the secret party archives in party committees.Early in theCRthecentralauthoritieshad issued documentsprohibitingpeople from entering thearchive (dang'an) offices. It was often useful to get people's file,if you wanted to attackthem for their pasts.So reddguardss were assigned for these breakins. Such breakinswere used at this stage especially to get materials on cadres.Some other people alsobroke in to look at their own dangan;people who had gotten in trouble in past or whowere not trusted by the leaders.But the students didn't have dang'an until their senior32

No. 139year.But even these dang'an were very short and simple. Since red guards wereexcused by Jiang Qing and other leaders,they were misused by the older and moremature rebels.So red guards were appointed to do things that the older people wereafraid to do because they might get in trouble for this,while red guards could get awaywith it.

The second kind of use that was made of students by the large factional allianceswas propaganda,or wengong. Red guards carried out propaganda and wrote posters notonly for themselves,but for other rebel organizations,like workers.For examples,if agroup of workers was given orders by the alliance to engage in an armed attack. Thecentral cultural revolution group prohibited organizations whose sole purpose was armedconflict.They said that armed conflict was only a secondary part of the CR, the majorpart was attacks through words,wengong, of top leaders. So when two factions areformed,there is a division of labor.Some people are organized for exclusively militaryactivities, while students are assigned to write wallposters, paper articles, handbills, andmakebroadcasts in thename of theworkers.After the two great factionswere formedmost of the things issued under workers’names were actually written by red guards.Because red guards were so young, energetic, and naive, very few of them could enter thecore leading groups of the major factional alliances.AAlso,student red guards did notaccept orders from headquarters without questioning.So the alliance heads werereluctant to issue orders to students because they knew they might not be obeyed.Whenthey wanted students to do something, they would call over the more mature red guardleaders for a meeting, say a lot of flattering things,and then give them advice about howto do something or what to do.Then the orders were actually given through these redguards themselves.

Why was the game played this way? Two reasons. The red guards were veryarrogant and self-confident. They felt that only they couldgrasp thespritof the CR andunderstand its true direction.Second, the older people did not what to be identifiedlater as instigators of red guard misdeeds.The adults were very conscious of the neednot to get involved openly, publicly,and in an observable wayinredguard deeds.Thefaction leaders also found it difficult torestrain the redguards,especially during certainstrategiccprojects were launched. When larger strategies were being formulated, thered guardswould often blow the strategyby acting too early,on their own.And in sodoing they would reveal the strategy in advance.When the faction leaders ran into thisthey would have to call in the red guard leaders in for a polite talk. They would try toconvince the red guards of the importance of strategy,in addition to bravery andcommitment.The red guards hated all compromises of this sort made by their factionleaders with the adults.And sometimes the red guards got suspicious of the intentionsof the faction leaders,especially of secret contacts between the faction leaders and cadres.But the faction still held together until the army moved in to seize back weapons aroundJune of1968Black Hands Behind the Movement

There are different levels of black hands. What is a black hand? In general, anyperson who is more experienced,sophisticated or mature and who manipulates theprocess of the CR. In terms of redguards,the faction leaders,or the more maturemembers of the same large faction could be black hands of the red guards because theywere giving them advice and suggestions. If the advice they give them in private isdifferent from what they say in public, they could be called black hands.But during the

No.139

33period of factional struggle,the term is used to refer to the former cadres who;workbehind the scenes to give advice to mass organizations.When the two factions wereprepared for full scale warfare,both sides needed individuals who did have battlefieldexperience, especially in command positions.Training,strategy,etc.

For our side there were two principal military advisors,a man named Huang,inhis early 5Os, he was a regimental commander during the Korean War. His unit was onthe front line against the American army.He got in trouble after we won one victoryafter another because he was such a good commander and won so many victories. SotheNorthKorean sidesent a lotofdelegationstoshowtheirthanks,andhehadanaffair with a Korean actress in a troupe that had come to entertain him. The armyseverely restricted this at the time,and according to regulations,he should have beenexecuted.But the Koreans petitioned the high authorities ro reduce his punishmentbecause he was a hero.He was then asked to choose his punishment:to be kicked outof the party, or kicked out of the army. He had been a soldier for more than twodecades,and loved the military life,he said without hesitation that he would give up theparty.This was a dumb move,because without party membership,how could he stay inthe army?Aftera fewmonths hewas kicked out of the army tohead a smallstatefarm near Xuancheng, and his rank was moved from 13 down to 18.By the time of theCR, he was isolated from politics in the locality. We all knew that he was a greatsoldier but had gotten into serious trouble.People used to say that his small headharmed his big head.He still gotmilitarybenefits but no political privileges at all.Forour side it didn't look good to have this kind of person as our advisor, but after a coupleof weeks of debate.We redguards opposed,but the older leaders argued that we werein a life and death struggle and needed people with military experience, and that unlesswe had a better candidate,we would have to take him.

After thinking about it for a couple days, Huang put forward a couple ofpreconditions.First, he was fully in charge of military issues, and his say is final. Hewouldn't interfere with political decisions,but he would not tolerate intervention in hisdecisions.He would quit immediately if this happened.Second,they cannot let theother side know that he is working for them,because this was against regulations,cadrescan't get involved in the mass organization's fighting.He knew that being a black handwas a serious crime.He also wanted the secret kept from the rank and file in thefaction itself. Third precondition was to protect his family. Fourth, if there is a futureinvestigation of this,you have to tell them that you came to me,I didn't come to you.So don't lie to the higher authorities later on.Our side accepted all the conditions.Hewas put in an office at the top floor of our headquarters,a building that belonged to aflour mill,about six stories tall.

The second black hand was a man named Xiao.He was deputy head of countygovernment handicraft industry bureau. He had Navy experience, had retired in late1950s.He was a senior captain when he retired.Before he joined Navy,though,he hadfought in the PLA infantry. Xiao in fact had recommended Huang as a superiorstrategist.

The function of these two black hands was to design military strategies for allpossible outcomes and circumstances. They were responsible for defending against anypossible guerilla attack from the other side.They were also responsible for all militarysupplies, how to get what from where.Our ideasaboutwhereto go to getweaponscame from them.They were also responsible for preparing for the worst,a situationwhere the other side had overwhelmingly superior force.Drew up detailed plans to take34

No.139over specific buildings throughout the county.Selected targets and plans of attack.Control of transportation too.Should block what roads,take control of what roads.Also emergency plans to destroy bridges.In two months they had drawn up all thecomprehensive plans for allkinds ofviolent conflicts.

There were also black hands not involved in military conflicts but in nonviolentfactional struggle between the two sides.After societywas divided into two largefactions, the upper levels were always warning cadres to stay away from involvement onany side.But cadres got involved nonetheless.Theydidsoforthreereasons.Firstisfamily members who are involved in faction in an important role.Second reason is oldcolleague connections from work units.These cadres have had loyal subordinates beforethe cultural revolution;sometimes these connections are kept in the CR movements.Third reason is more interesting. After society divided itself into two factions, theyspent all their time fighting each other, and the cadres were forgotten.They didn't haveto attend struggle session and write confessions all day.They had a lot of free time.Sotheywent outonto streetstoread thewallposters.Sometimes they enjoyed the polemicsso much that after reading so many wallposters,they became sympathetic toward oneside or another. Also,these cadres sometimes didn't have good relationships with theirbosses before the CR.When their bosses were attacked,sometimes cadres who workedunder them were willing to stand up and provide evidence.And other cadres would liketo dothis to clear up their own cases.

When it came time to form the new revolutionary committees and great alliances,the attitudes of the cadres changed. Before that, some cadres had got involved, but verysmall proportion. But when it was time to set up new revolutionary committees,all thecadres,or practically all, took the initiative to come to rebel groups to talk with them,and prove their political preference and ideological orientation.They wanted to beunderstood.Because now they had a new chance.Before this, the majority of cadreswere very passive. Now they were becoming very active.Which side they approacheddepended on their connections,their family members’opinions,their calcuation of whichside would win out,his relationships with the higher authorities and the factional leadersrelations with higher authorities.

The interesting thing is that while the red guards were out in front of all theother activities of the CR,they were kept from knowing much about the process offorming the revolutionary committees. The older comrades in the large factionsconsciouslyykept red guards in the dark about the negotiations toward formingtherevolutionary committees.This is one reason for red guards'subsequent criticalreflections on the CR.As an activist in the red guards,I recall that I was alwaysinformed of important matters in the large faction.Many matters closed to o;rdinarymembers were open to me.But at that time I felt that when the cadres came around totalk with the big faction leaders,there developed an uncomfortable feeling betweenfaction leaders and red guards.The faction leaders didn't want us to know their relationwith old cadres. We had good relations with them,they relied on us in the past, andthey felt the need to explain things to us. But we could tell that whatever they told usthey told us reluctantly.At this point,the workers were out of the process,and the redguards were out of the process.Only those factional leaders who were lower rankingcadres before the CR are key people in these negotiations and relationships. So the redguards felt that these faction leaders,more experienced and sophisticated,were not aspure as the red guards, they were not as selfless.

Among the leaders who had been workers or ordinary employees before the CR35

No.139thered guards had heard from them the mistreatment they had experienced in theirunits about promotion, pay raises, housing, joining the party, and so forth. And redguards like me were already unhappy that there appeared to be a causal relationshipbetween these selfish complaints and their acticism in the CR.We didn't like it becauseit seemed they were fighting for selfish reasons, not pure ones. So first we found self-intersted workers early in the movement,and now we find self-interested cadres,who areinterested in how they come out in the newly forming power arrangements.When wefound this out,we found once again that the CR was even more complicated than wethought before.And I was quite disappointed,sometimes even angered.

There were longstanding divisions among cadres.In south Anhui,there was aHebei bang,and an Anhui bang..The Hebei cadres had come down with the PLA in1949, in Hebei the party had been very strong before 1949. The competition between thetwo factions in Xuanchenghad been fairly balanced.Neither side had predominated.The head of our school was in the Hebei bang. Mr. Xiao was also a Hebei man. Xiaohad not been very successful politically before CR, so perhaps that was a motivation forhim to join in.In early 1968 Li Desheng moved into take over the provincialgovernment in Hefei with the 12th army. This was the stage when a lot of officialsbegan to give factions a lot of politcal advice.At this time,cadres started to play a verysensitive role,telling the factions about the relations between various cadres in theleadership, who had gotten in trouble in previous campaigns, who is experienced in whatkind of politics, who is vulnerable on what issues, whose daughter married whose son,and so forth.Allthesethingsstarted to comeout from thecadresduringthisperiod；they sought to give us some information to use in the upcoming negotiations.Factional Politics,Late 1967 to Summer 1968（7/2/90,3hrs.)

There was not much street fighting in the summer of 1967,but as explainedabove,both sides were preparing for warfare.The capitalist roaders and bad elements inthe work units,to repeat what he mentioned before,were no longer of great ineterst tothe rebels.Since they were forgotten,they didn't receive pphysical mistreatment andtorture.They would dress in ordinaryclothes,wear the placard with big cable aroundtheir neck,and stand to the side of the street with their heads down..Ordinary peoplewould walk past them.Early on people were curious and would make fun of them asthey passed by,but with the passage of time people became accustomed to it and didn'tpay much attention. After a half hour or hour of confession and self-criticism in themorning, the targets would go home for lunch,then would go to clean public toiletsdining room, street to do some manual labor.Every once in a while the red guardswould remember them and come back and demand new confessions,but to a greatextend these targets lived in peace.People like Jiang Qing and Zhang Chunqiao alwaysreminded us that these old capitalist roaders were benefitting from the factional fightingand that red guards should concentrate on problems in their work units. This is why,after the factional fighting period, the central authorities turned attention back to theseold targets in the cleansing of the class ranks,yida sanfan, dou pi gai (which includedanti May 16 elementscampaign).

The first major incident of armed confrontation took place right around NewYear's day of 1968.This was sparked by our side.We heard intelligence reports thatthe other side had very advanced weapons and had planned a full scale military attackfor around January 1.When we hear this,Mr.Huang our military advisor decided tosendout two reconnaissance teams.One team was mainly dock workers,they carried

No. 139

36heavy weapons,like machine guns and semiautomatic weapons. The other team werestudent red guards.They were sent out to the other faction's headquarters at the citypower station.Our headquarters was at the east end of town,at the rice flour mill,theirs at the north end of town.The distance between the two buildings was about 2km. The teams reached the power company at about midnight. The red guards teamused loudspeakers to yell slogans,hidden behind embankments in a field. The other sidestarted to shoot as soon as they heard the loudspeakers.And the guys with militaryexperience wrote a map of where the fire was coming from. Neither side had anycasualties.But the other side realized by the next morning that they had been fooledinto revealing their positions.

So they sent an expedition out to our headquartesr. This was the last couple ofdays of December. They sent people with heavy weapons to Xuancheng Normal School,second best school in town,most of students there on our side.When they attacked thecampus, they intended to attract a rescue team from our side. Mr.Huang realized thiswas a trick. He decided to send a rescue team just to feint at the Normal School, butsent a much larger force to another one of their strongholds,the party and govt.compound.He wanted to attack there because the road to Wuhu and Hefei went bythere,and this would be a strategic position.About 30 heavily armed dockworkers weresent to thenormal school,butmore than 1oo were sent to the government compoundWhen the larger force heard the shooting at the normal school,theybegantheirattackWe took four casualties in the small team early,but Huang said to continue with ourplan. Turned out 4-5 dead workers there. But our side had already ddestroyedthegovernemnt compound walls. But we could only take some of the smaller buildings iuthe compound,the larger one defended with machine guns.We tookmore than 10casualties. I was in the headquarters at this time so all this information was cominginto;the headguarters.

Early the next afternoon (the attack had begun at midnight), Huang ordered allhis troops to retreat. We lost more than the other side; 5 dead workers and more than10 wounded.Other side 2 killed and several wounded.Up to this point Xuanchenghadhad no killings. The next several days our propaganda section was busy publicizing thedeaths we suffered at thehands of the other side.To get sympathy from the other sidewe organized a large public funeral march through the town.The five deadworkerswere so mutilated by bullet holes that some you couldn't recognize, their clothes weretattered to shreds.I felt so sorry for them;their familieswerewailingand climbing allover them.We made large steel wreaths, fancy wooden coffins.The wreath was steel,12.25 meters tall, took four trucks to transport it (12/25) was the date of the battle. Weused black and white to decorate all the main streets in town. We put up sloganscondemning the other side in their own territory.The other side was so frightened byall of this, they didn't even resist when we put up things on their turf. NOrmally theywould have given us a big beating for this.

Before the deaths, everyone was preparing for casualties, but after the actualdeaths,both sides got very frightened.After this event,public support wentoverwhelmingly to us,whereas before it was about evenly split or indifferent.Thefuneral was so impressive,with the huge wreath and the grieving family members.Ahuge crowd collected and wore mourning clothes,black or white armbands andheadbands.Wedesigned and made traditionalmourning clothes for the familiesmadeofburlap.Its odd that we used the traditional mourning clothes because in the earlierstages of the CR this was considered to be one of the four olds. But we wanted to37

No. 139appeal to the general public so we used the traditional garb. Some even suggested thatwe have a ceremony to release the souls of the dead (chaodu).We marched across allthemain streetsof town.

Mr. Huang said we had to prepare for the worst, but today was our day. Heprepared for more serious attacks on that very day.The most important members of ourfaction did not attend the funeral; they prepared for further fighting. To my mind thiswas the most dangerous day of the entire period of warfare;Huang was preparing for abloodbath if the other side attacked.The other side,though,did not act at all.

I myself experienced danger in the second military action,which was before thespring festival,early February 1968. By this time the other side had set up aheadquarters right in the middle of town,which had not had any military installationsup to this point. They occupied the department store building, 3 stories, in the middleoftown.We became so angry because previously we had left the center of town forordinary citizens. So we decided to; occupy our own buildings downtown, otherwise wewould be weakened strtegically.Acording to;the original plan,to take over thesestrategic building was the task of the workers.TAhis time the red guards took theinitiative and went to Mr. Huang.We told him that the last time the workers paid toohigh a price, and that we should do something. Huang really approved of this, thoughtitwasgreat.

:There was a two storey department store across the street.We eight red guardsvolunteered to take it over.So we went out.We all had guns,butwe didn't haveenough bullets. I had an automatic rifle with bayonet, and a handgun. But only 30bullets.We broke into the store in the middle of the night;but it was so dark one ofour people broke some glass inside and then the other side starated to shoot do;wnrandomly at the building.The bullets went right through the thin wooden doors of thebuilding,and the bullets hit the concrete floor creating sparks.When the shootingstopped we made our way up to the second floor; there was more light up there.Wewere so dumb thatwe didn't even bring any food or water with us,in addition to fewbullets. After a few hours we got hungry, and since this was January it was very cold.We decided not to eat the cookies and crackers in the store,because that was stealingstate property (we were still ideologically pure). But eventually we decided that this wasa special situation and our survival was at stake.Wedecided to put down ournamesand the quantities and type of food we had taken, with a promise to repay.

In the morning, we didn't even dare to look out the windows. So I used a mirrorto hold up to the window and look.Immediately a hail of bullets smashed the mirror,cutting up my hand and face with the splinters. The other side didn't know we onlyhad a couple of students there with few bullets.They had several machine guns andplentyof bullets;and they continually strafed the buildings.But we never shot once allday. On the second evening, the headquarters sent workers to relieve us and we wentback.This was my only combat experience.When we returned to the headquarters,wewere treated like heroes.Before this,students had not taken the initiative in militaryactions.

After this, there was not much intense fighting in Xuancheng. By this time,people were very concerend and frightened about armed combat. Both sides becamemuch more restrained after this point. There were still a few casualties after this,butmainly from long distance firing, not from hand to hand combat. I guess that the townwas so small and close knit thatpeople thought that ifyou did something bad andsomeone saw you, eventually you would get in trouble someday for this. During this38

No.139military period,both sides tried to avoid face to face confrontations.They would shootout from buildings but no direct engagements.Firing from buildings was safer becausethey couldn't see y;ou and you really couldn't see them. In large cities like Wuhu,Huainan, and Bangpu there was much more violent. In large cities it is much harder forpeople to identify and recognize one another.So in these places the combat was morefierce.The density of social life in Xuancheng,I think,helped to limit the most bloodlyviolence.This was true even in the earlier stages when people used fists and shoving tofight.Peoplewould warn one another not to get too rough because they would say thattheyknewyouandwouldreportyoulateron.When people started to talk like that,theviolenceof theconfrontations immediatelywas reduced.

During spring festival one afternoon I went home to pick up some clothes. Homewas territory of the enemy. I had just sat down to eat lunch.Just then we hearda lotof noise out on the street, and saw a squad from the other side,coming from theirheadquarters, going down the street and shooting. I didn't go out to see what they wereshooting at; people on the streets were screaming and running away. My stepfathercame back in and said they probably were coming to look for me. He asked what I hadwith me;I had my organization's armband and gun.He immediately took them awayfrom me,werapped them in dirty clothes and hid them in an underground jar. He toldme to take off myglasses, change my clothes and hide. I was so afraid I thought theywere going tohang me.Within minutes,a squad came to my home.My stepfatherwent out to talk to them,he knew the construction worker head of the team,Maopersonally.They went away, and about 10 minutes later I took my things and ran away.his was the greatest danger I was ever in. Mr. Xie, a leader of our faction had beencaptured by them before, and in order to force a confession they used a huge steel pot toscare him with being boiled alive. Xie confessed and nothing happened to him;hedivulged all our secrets thoughEnd of Factional Struggle:Xuexi Ban and Anti May 16 Elements

The xuexi ban was set up when Li Desheng moved his 12th army from northJiangsu, at the order of Chairman Mao, to impose martial law in Anhui. He had mosttrouble in Wuhu. He realized that the key places to restore order were Wuhu andHuainan,where the fighting had been most violent. In Huainan his army surrounded allthe major strongholds of the armed rebels,forced them to give up and surrender theirweapons. In Wuhu he did things differently. By this time Mao and Lin Biao had issueda directive to surrender all weapons. In Wuhu, after this document was read out, thetwo;sides reduced their armed confrontations,but neither side would turn in theirweapons first.They were afraid of being left defenseless.Li Deshenghimselfwentoutin his uniform,wearing straw sandals and leggings of the preliberation army. Hepersonally visited the strongholds of both sides, and did not bring a large team ofbodyguards with him in order to show he was trustworthy, and didn't carry a gun.When he visited the headquarters of the red rebels, the doors and windows were alreadyblocked up and reinforced,so he had to use a ladder to get in,and all the bodyguardswere left behind,scared to death for their commander,since random shooting was stilltaking place. But both sides were impressed with his bravery and commitment, thatboth sides agreed to stop shooting,take down their street blockades.he tried toestablish relationships with the heads of both sides;both sides began to trust him. Hesucceeded in stopping the fighting where many other commanders had failed. He waspraised at the 9th party congress for this;Mao singled him out for praise and had him39

No. 139stand up.Mao told him that he had understood the essence of political work.He waspromoted from Central Committee to Politburo at that time, and eventually becameranked No. 5 in party, behind Mao, Zhou, Lin, and Kang Sheng.

In Xuancheng when the army moved in, all the big cities had already beenquelled, so both sides surrendered their weapons without resistance. There were someweapons,however,maybe about 10-15% that were never accounted for.Chairman Maohad a direactive to send peasants down to the villages to be reeducated by the peasants.InAugust1968wehadalhuge rally right in fron the the Xuancheng middle school.Eachofus was givena figtt of the four volume Mao's collected works,with two farmimplements,andabigredpaper flower.Students 18 and older should go to countryside;younger could stay home.I was only 16 so I could stay home.But I didn't, for tworeasons.One,myffamily was so poor;I felt such psychological presure every time I wenthom to eat; I figured I could support myself in the countryside. Second, I still believedin the revolutionary spirit, and thought I should temper myself in the countryside.During therallyI wrote two lines in the Mao's works:"go to the countryside to trainyourself as a great revolutionary and fight for the liberation of all mankind". I reallymeant this;I believed this very sincerely at that time.

But unfortunately most of the other red guards went immediately to thecountryside, while I stayed in the school. The school was now run by the militarypropaganda team and the workers propaganda team. All the government positions,including public security system,was taken over by the 12th army. When the twopropganda teams were sent to Qinghua University in early 1968,the two sides were stillfighting, and some members of the teams were shot to death--this was the workers'propaganda team, not the army. I guess that the first team to come was the workersteams, unarmed. So from this I guess Mao decided that with unarmed workers’teamsalone,the fighting couldn't be stopped,so they sent out military teams with the workersteams to Xuanchenglater on.

There were only two or three members of the military team that came to themiddle school, low ranking officers. They didn't stay very long.Byend of 1968,soldiershad already withdrawn to their units. But county government was still run by the army.The main work was done by the workers’ team.Altogether they had 7 or 8 members.They came from the tea factory and the agricultural machineryfactory,where I wouldlater work for five years.Military team members had to beepartymembers,and had tobe model soldiers or model officials.And you had to have some education,and no familyties in the locality.For the workers'team,first you had to be a worker in a stateowned factory, second, you had to have basic education,third, partyymembershippreferred but not required (some were not party members),andyou should not havebeen xiaoyao pai in the CR.This implied that some worker team members had beenmembers of former factions.Fortunately most of the workers in our school's team werepreviously in our faction,so they were more sympathetic with us than the other side.After the soldiers returned to their units,the workers'team moved onto the campus andbecame a permanent part of the school authorities. The stayed in place as a regularinstitution of school leadership,even though its members might be changed,until the fallof the gang of four in late 1976. For eight years they ran the school, finally sent awayby Deng Xiaoping who didn't like them.

The Xuexi ban beganin October 1968, through the end of the year.About 30students in our school were asked to stay in school and take part in the xuexi ban, fromboth factions.The participants were informed that our responsibility was to tell the40

No.139truth: who was behind all the factional fighting and seizing of weapons from the army.Who organized us, who supported us, who gave us information, supplies, plans. Whotook part, did we witness any killing, did we know anything about various incidents--usually killings, attacks on banks, military bases, government buildings, etc. Who wrotethe influential articles,especially those attacking the PLA (mentioned in earlierinterview),and articles stimulated armed conflict. Who had participated in events inNanjing,who had attacked Zhou Enlai,who had reprinted May 16 propaganda material,who took valuable items either from individuals or the state.We all confessedeverything.

The members of the teams talked to each of us individually, said they already hadplenty of evidence about us and other things;if we would confess and tell the truth,ourproblem would be reduced; if we had done something terribly wrong, we can get creditfor turning someone in about something they had done.

Our school in the mean time had organized a“massess dictatorship team(qunzhong zhuanzheng dadui), members appointed by the progaganda teams, who hadtheir own armbands and all carried wooden clubs about two meters long with red andwhite stripes. Most of the bad things during the Cleansing of the Class ranks campaignlater on was done by them.They really engaged in terror during these later campaigns.During this period so many persecutions and investigations were being carried out thattheofficial jails couldn'thandle them.Everyunithad theirown dictatorshipteamandcells.

When we had a meeting of the Xuexi ban, a man from the public security bureauwould read out an official charge against one of us,and order us to be put under arrest.The members of the dictatorship team would rush up, grab the guy, force him to kneel,handcuff him and then drag him away. We began with 30 members, and as each weekpassed,our numbers were reduced,and nobody knew who would be draggedaway nextAll of the people in the study grouphad been leadersofvariousredguardorganizations;and the purpose of the xuexi ban was to settle accounts with red guards for doing all thethings they had been encouraged to do:.This was the period when many of us began tothink critically about the entire cultural revolution.This was the first time I faced thepossibility of arrest.Victims during the Campaigns(7/11/90,2hrs.)

The first one arrested in 1968 from my school was Duan Shuanglin,early autumn,during the time we were in the xuexi ban.It was funny,he was arrested in earlySeptember1968.Atthattimetheformalprison system had not yet been restored.Sothe county junguan xiaozu and the newlyreestablished public securitybureau chose thecounty cultural hall as the jail for people arrested for CR reasons.The surrounding yardwas a large compound,and inside could hold more than 2o0 people.I had to send himsome cigarettes and food.He was released after about 50-60 days.He was terriblyfrightened when first arrested,but after a week,when I delivered food to him,he saidhe wasn't worried because there were so many people there who had much worseproblems than him.There were others in the county also arrested,several workers,including Mr.Yang, the dockworker who headed the military group in our faction,alongwith the two black hands, Mr. Huang and Mr. Xiao who had been military advisors, andanother Mr. Xiao, who was one of the leaders of my large faction, he worked at myfather's power plant. Mr. Mao, head of military section of the other faction, was alsoarrested. I can't remember many names from the other side, but my impression was

No. 139

41definitely that more were arested from our side than theirs,about 2 to 1.

Duan said that the one thing he couldn't handle, though, was the torture. Thefirst thing they did to you was to a yard in the compound with concrete floor, make youkneel down on the concrete at noon for half an hour or an hour,temperature was over100 degrees and very humid.Ifyou had a bad attitude,up to two hours.This wascalled xiama wei,a traditional way of new Chinese rulers frightening subjects with theawe of your power. If you sang songs in jail,they put metal handcuffs on you andtightened them until it cut into the skin,or force you to carry a heavy board with thecable around your neck all day long.Food was terrible,too little and very poor quality.The rice was already a little rotten,taken from the bottom of the state warehouses.Notdry rice but xifan,mostly water. Rotten vegetables,no meat.He said the worst thingwas the hunger.Ifyou didn't behave badly,they would let your family send you foodand cigarettes;ifyou behaved poorly,they took awaythis prvilege..Quicklyeveryonegave up resistance and conformed

After being released, after about 3 weeks Duan was arrested again. They toldhim that this was because other people were revealing things about him in theirinterrogations that meant he had to go over everything all over again from thebeginning.

Bai Zimin, the guy from the countryside, was also arrested. He was arrested forone reason. In early 1968, during the spring festival,a lot of peasants and even escapedprisoners began to gamble regularly.They started to call themselves wuhu sihai zaofandui. They made trouble in the communities where they gambled, including robbery, rape,beating,vandalism.Local peasants hated these people so much that in some places theyorganized themselves for self-defense. But the gamblers had learned a kind of guerillatactics from reading Mao's works in jail.They moved all over from county to county.Nobody knewwhere they would strike next or when.There was no public securitybureau in operation them and they had to organize in self-defense.

They even came to us to plead for protection, because we red guards had armsandpeopleewere afraid of us.We ran off to avillage about 15km away and surroundedabiggroupoof people gambling.We took back two of them who had raped women,andwere going to hand them over to the military the next day.But in the middle of thenight two peasants snuck in and hanged them on a tree outside.Bai Zimin was heldresponsible for this,and was put in jail for half a year.

The main charge against all the people arrested was that they had engaged insome kind of violence.The official definition of bad elements to be arrested wasfourfold: 1) murderers, 2) rape, robbery, vandalism of state property, esp. banks andtransport system,3) destroying or stealing official archives or disclose state secrets,4)acting as black hands who directed violent factional activity.

They interrogated everyone to reveal what they had done and seen,but they werereally looking for black hands and bad leaders. The more you could reveal things aboutthese people,the better they would treat you.Duan said they had asked a lot ofquestions about me,especially the articles I had written attacking capitalist roaders inthe army.He said he denied that I had any links with others in the big cities inrelation to the attacks on the military establishments.If he had admitted I had donesomething wrong, I could have been put in jail.

There were also two students arrested from Xuancheng Normal College. Duringthe whole period,there were really few students arrested.Most of those arrested wereurban workers and suburban peasants, because they had been most active in the fighting.

No. 139

42They also concentrated on urban residents who did not have fixed employment.Thesewere temporary and contract workers.They had never organized themselves as contractas temporary workers, because such organizations were declared counterrevolutionary inDecember 1966.But they were active in the large factions,joined the rebel organizationsin the residents committees.People were quite suspicious of them because they had themost complicated and suspicious class backgrounds.They didn't really have bad classbackgrounds,just complicated;theyyhad worked as casual laborers, servants of richfamilies, owned small shops, peddlers and middlemen, forced labor in KMT army. Toocomplicated,neither clearly good or bad. These people couldn't be easily categorized inthe official categories,so their cases were complicated.

During the Xuexi ban they urged us to reflect carefully on the activities of peoplewho had complicated backgrounds.They said we students were young and easilymislead, but certainly didn't want to overthrow Mao and the socialist system. They wereespecially suspicious of the motives of people with complicated backgrounds,because theymight have a motive to attack the system.They told us to give them more informationabout these people and they would be more satisfied with that. They also were veryinterested in the relations between the black hands and the redguards.What were theirmotives? What did they promise? Did they want to become an official in a newgovernment? Who organized and gathered the intelligence for the attacks on armybases?Anti May 16 Elements Campaign

This campaign was funny, since the vast majority of the students were alignedwith our faction, and most of the violence was committed by us. The other side wasvery small and there wasn't much they had to account for.But we tried to report onthe other side to make sure it was not only our people who would be punished.Wereported Gao Enlai for bringing back documents from Nanjing and copying them.Theygot him for being a May 16 elements,because they figured he had got in touch with theorganization in Nanjing..He was only in jail for 3 weeks,I think because he was notinvolved at all in violence. So far as I know in the county, no one else was arrested inthis campaign.The worst things happened during 1970,when I was already working inthe factory.They investigated a number of college students who had been sent down toour factory for being possible May 16 elements. This was in 1970 and 1971. But theywere never charged or punished.Critical Reflections on the Cultural Revolution

My own critical reflections on the CR began by accident when I read a red guardnewspaper from Anqing, published by students at the Anqing Normal School, November1967.The article was an editorial that discussed the confrontation between red guardsand the conservatives in the military nationwide.The conflict between the redguardsand army was very tense because of influence of Hubei and Wuhan, where the first bigconfrontation between rebels and the army took place in mid-1967. There was a largedaily ferry service between Wuhan and Anqing, so the influence of Wuhan upon Anqingwas very large, and students in Anqing had a strong reaction against the military.

The editorial tried to explain whythe reddguard/army confrontation emerged inmid-1967,and more importantly why this confrontation was immediately suppressed.Why couldn't the hated capitalist roaders in the army be exposed,why suchviolentsuppressio of those who had raised the issue? The editorial explained that there is a

No. 139

43strong vested interest network linking capitalist roaders in the army and certain toppolitical leaders in Beijing who still pretend to be CR leaders.The article wasimpressive; it quoted a lot of passages from Marx,and a few from Lenin.

After I read this article,I felt much clearer about the situation that before.I wasvery convinced by the solid logic of the analysis.I not only read it myself but showed itto all around me,told them that we face the same situation in Xuancheng. I alsoshowed it to some of my teachers.I felt that it was reading Marx that gave this authorsuch an ability to understand things.From this point on,I read a lot of Marx.Andfrom this point on, my view of the CR changed..For the first timeI was abletodistance myself from the CR, and view the whole thing from above. I began to questionthe Cultural Revolution itself and moreover Mao's intention,and Mao's political andmoralqualities.LaterI heard that theauthors of thisarticlewere arrested bythemilitary in Anqing.

By the time the leaders were arrested in the xuexi ban,all of our illusions weregone.We felt we were being discriminated against.Jiang Qing herself had instigatedour actions,and the violence that followed.It wasn't fair.Wehad the ideatogetweapons from the army before,but not until Jiang Qing encouraged it openely did wedaretodoso.When we received her approval for this kind of action, we finally acted.During the entire xuexi ban period,nobody ever mentioned JiangQingasthereason forour actions.Theyalways asked us who encouraged us to act this way,but nobody daredto attribute this to Jiang Qing in front of the interrogators.So we felt totallymanipulated at this point.When we red guards in the xuexi ban got together alone totalk, we would curse people, we had Jiang Qing in mind but of course we never daredsay it openly,,though we all felt the same way.

During this same period I also found that some of my friends from my factionwere singled out as hated class enemies and had to carry heavy boards around theirnecks and stand by the road. I remember one, a Mr. Xu, who was a cadre in the supplyand marketing cooperative.During the period of violence,we lived several months in thecooperative's building.In the spring festival of 1968 we stayed in their offices.At thattime there were cental directives ordering us to give up our weapons,disperse ourorganizations, and go back to our original units.When we heard this we all felt sad anddiscouraged.Xu wrote a moving poem to express his disappointment at the way we hadbeen betrayed.All our efforts,commitment,blood over 2 1/2 years came to nothing inthe end.We all loved this poem deeply.He pasted up the poster on the inside wall ofthe yard, but we copied it and put it up all over. But by the autumn of 1968, his unithad its own xuexi ban, and Mr. Xu was "dug out", it was charged he was a rightist in1957 and was still a rightist even though his cap was later taken off. They said hismotive in participating in the CR was togain revenge on the party for that.His poemwas said to show sentiments of the class enemy and was to prove his evil intention tomake rebels and red guards kill one another.When we saw this humble, friendly,kindman become disgraced, called an enemy and now dressed so scantily in the winter. Hewas used and betrayed and we felt just the same.WethoughtinourheartsaboutMaoand Jiang Qing:"when you needed us, we did so much for you, and now at this crucialpoint, you betray us and jail us,without a single word of admission of your ownresponsibility.What kind of people are you?"

What added to our feeling is that more cadres were coming back to their oldpositions. Things came to a big circle: those in power before the CR were still inpower, and those powerless before are still powerless. Those privileged before are still

No.139

44privileged; those who had nothing before still had nothing: guanren de hai guanren; beiguandehai beiguan.

描述：

