id: b22b3ad9fd
标题：A Small-Character Poster Entitled, 'The Nation’s Populace Ponders Deeply'
日期：1978-0-0
是否是时间段：false
作者：四川省成都市中级人民法院
来源：西南政法学院刑法教研室, 冤假错案选编, 9-10
标签：文章
书籍：A Small-Character Poster Entitled, 'The Nation’s Populace Ponders Deeply'
书籍作者：四川省成都市中级人民法院

正文：
# A Small-Character Poster Entitled, “The Nation’s Populace Ponders Deeply”

Zhang Jiankui, male, forty-four years old, from Wenjiang County, Sichuan, middle-peasant family background, worker class status, formerly worked as accountant at Chengdu Wangjiaba rubber factory. After his arrest on 8 May 1976, the Chengdu Dongcheng District Public Security Office initiated proceedings against him at the Dongcheng District People’s Court for having committed active counterrevolutionary crimes. Zhang later developed liver disease and died while seeking medical treatment outside of prison.

At the beginning of March 1976, Zhang Jiankui wrote a smallcharacter poster entitled “The Nation’s Populace Ponders Deeply.” The full text of this small-character poster read: “Now in our nation, a small clique of individuals, including Zhang Chunqiao, Yao Wenyuan, and Wang Hongwen with the stupid slut Jiang Qing as their head, wants to kill off all the former Party center leaders that the people of our nation respect from the depth of our hearts. The Premier, the Vice-Premiers, the marshals, the old generals, the heads of every department and committee, the heads of the army, the heads of every provincial, municipal, and autonomous region -- they want to kill all these old heads so that they can usurp the Party and the state’s leadership power, become the head and premier of the country, and install their allies in every department and every region. What is socialism? Can a small clique of people taking the center stage be considered socialism? The fact that they have yet to succeed taking the center stage is deemed to be just by everyone in the country. They all want to recklessly press charges against [others]. Stupid slut Jiang is a present-day Su Danji, Wu Zetian, a White Bone Spirit, a pestilence spirit. [They] kill off group after group of old leaders whom we most respect and who had endured decades of hardship and struggles, which is something we the people of the country cannot tolerate in our hearts. Who is good and who is bad, we the people of this country know [who], [and we] are secure in our judgment. Chairman Mao is the most respected and supported by everyone in this country. But a small clique of individuals are pursuing their special interests and wants to usurp the power of our country. Stupid slut Jiang, what kind of creature are you? What are your true colors? Today there is Chairman Mao so you can make claims to high positions. In the future, the people of this country will come and settle their accounts with you all, and take revenge for all the old leaders of every department and every region.”

Chengdu District People’s Court and the District Public Security Office jointly examined [the circumstances] and concluded that Zhang Jiankui’s writing and posting of the essay entitled “The Nation’s Populace Ponders Deeply” was purely caused by extreme dissatisfaction with the Gang of Four’s usurpation of Party power and irrational desires to strike down leading comrades in Party, state and military organizations at the center, as well as in the regions. The spearhead of the struggle is completely pointed at the Gang of Four. Dongcheng District Public Security Office already disclosed a written ruling for this case, which was to thoroughly rehabilitate [Zhang] and restore his political reputation. Dongcheng District People’s Court will use prison allowances to make up for Zhang’s missed salary during his period of detention, give welfare support to his children, and adequately carry out follow-up work.

Selected from Chengdu Municipal Middle-Level People’s Court in Sichuan, Case Examples, November 1978.

Translated by Menghan Yan

描述：

