id: e38a251e56
标题：Hong Kong Interviews: Informant No. 79
日期：1984-7-1
是否是时间段：false
作者：Andrew G. Walder
来源：
标签：文章
书籍：Hong Kong Interviews: Informant No. 79
书籍作者：Andrew G. Walder

正文：
No。 79Background:(7/1/84，3 hrs。)

The informant is a Shanghai middle school graduate who wassentdowntothecountryside withseveralotherclassmatestoacommunenear Nantong city, Jiangsu province, for tempering。 He says theyall thought it was a laughable policy。 In l975 he was hired asa worker at a large collective factory that wove color blended cloth,and employed about 500 people,in Nantong。In 1978 he took the collegeentrance exams and tested into medical school in Shanghai。Afterthat time he had no contact with the factory.Labor Policy

The factory hired peasants from the communes as permanent workersif they used their land to build the factory on. This was a writtenagreement between the factory and the commune。The commune gets toselect the peasants for the job。They are not completelyguding workers.These workers are under the collective，not the factory。They are transferedby the county labor bureau。 Below them are the regular contract workersfor fixed periods。Below that are the temporary workers who work for only afew dayss at a time。Contract workers can be very long term if thebusiness6isS good and the workers biaoxian is good. In China they emphasizerenqing; you don't just fire someone because you don'tneedthem。

Its likea moral thing。The peasant permanent workers are called tudi gong.

Tudi gong are under the commune.They do not get state labor insurance.Their wages are figures by the factory, but their insurance, if you couldsay they had any at all, was the communes responsibility.They hadthewubaohu。That's about all they had。They got no pensions。Tudi,hetong,and linshi gong all have the possibility of becoming a permanent workeraccording to the permission of the gongye ju.The tudi gong are not ontheregularwageesystem。Theyare paidbytheffactoryaccording totheiryears of service and their type of work。‘They don't get wage readjustmentswith everyone else.. Sometimes they used the piece rate system for theseworkers as well as the contract and temporary workers。 1Digging holes,repairing roads, moving goods--they are paid by the job。 If their workisn't good, theyycan be returned to the commune in exchange for another。If they are really good, they can eventually become a permanent worker.In that case they got a grade and insurance and benefits, and their unitis the factory。But they still can't change their hukou to the city.

There are two ways to get rid of a worker: a punitive chuming, andan explusion, or kaichu。 Chumingg is a little less6seriousasanadministrative punishment, but you're still fired。For example，a youngwoman in our factory felt her life had no meaning, and took off wanderingto Tibet, without bothering to ask for leave。Sheviolatedthefactoryrules, but didn't commit any serious offense, so they did not kaichu her,but instead, chuming.Shop Management

The men didn't usually work in the knitting shops, but in the machineryshops.lBut he was sent to the knitting shop during his training period.They had a 3 shift, 24 hour system.

They had a banzhang for each shift.Each shift had three group leaders.Each small group had about 10-20

They also had a shopdirector， whoworkers, depending on the shop.had 50-60 workers on each shift。They also had a repair shop where mostofthemenworked.

(2)

They had only a branch party committee in the factory。They had asmall party group in each shop. The shop party group was led by a femaleworker from the countryside, uneducated。She was an old worker。 Thepurpose of the party was to get the workers to obey the party rules andwork hard, but the main reason was to keep an eye on the workers politicalthought。They would have political meetings in groups, and the leaderwould always report (huibao) the results。People didn't want to say muchbecause the ears of these old workers belong to the party.

When an order came down, the factory party members discussed it,then everyone else in the factory did so。At that time they said the partyleads everything, not just thought。T This has changed very much in this

Shop directors often were party members, but not always。respect.They also had to understand the shops production and had to have goodrelations with others。But you also had to be politically reliable。 You don'tnecessarily havetobe a party member to be reliable。You simply have todemonstrate that you listen to the party (obey would be a better translationof ting).

Every group met for 30 minutes before each shift。 They also hada meeting after each shift for half an hour。They would talk about factory

Sometimes the shopproblems， or they would get talked to about them。director himself would talk to the workers。The smallgroupleader wasnominated by boththe production working group and the politicai workinggroup of the shop。The small group leader was chosenbythe shop directorafter discussions among the group。Theshopdirectorisalsoselectedfrom among the workers and appointed from the top。(Group leaders can alsobe transfered around freely.

Groupleaders are not necessarilypartymembers.These are workers who have stayed after the shift to do work ona volunteer basis, often young and good workers。

They have their own workresponsibilities.

The group leaders don't really have any special responsibility。Theyhave technical responsibilities。If a problem appears in the material,the group leader is responsible for fixing it。  He helps workers solveproblems。If you have anything you want to bring up you do it with thegroup leader。IIf you have to go nurse your baby you ask the group leader.The group leader arranges the replacement for a while。 But the shift headis responsible for giving permission for leave。Most of the power is theshift head's。The shift head appoints the group leaders as their helpers。It is like military command relationships; each level takes orders from theabove.Benefits

In their large collective factory they got free medicine,retirementpensions, cool drink fee in summer,relief payments and subsidies，and theworkers themselves had a collectivegongjijin，to help out workerssintimes

They had a dormitory, but it was very small and only forof troubles..a small number of the night shift workers.When he visited in 1980 theyhad built bigger dorms for the night shift to sleepinbeforethe shift。They also had a single person's dorm.  About l0% of the workers lived in

Ifyou live outside the factorythese residences.initially, later about 5o%。1they gave you a subsidy.Very few workers livedlintheir: own apartments.

The union handed out: industrial coupons according to whoregisteredto

I very rarely heard of peoplee getting things this way,line：up）forthem.through1 registration。This is just a formality.People usually got thesethings onlyythrough siren guanxi with people in the union.You can apply

(3)for these things, but it is really distributed through siren guanxi。Thiswas the power of the union group head in the factory.HHehadnorealpowers of office but he did have control over these things。Theunionalso passes out tickets for movies, and that's about all the activitiesthey arranged.SSometimes they visited sick workers,organized swimming

The union organized non-political activities.outings.

The youth league was not much, mainly was organized in schools, begin-ningin middle school.But the influence of the youth league was small.Not many workers in the factory were of the proper age.Every shop hada league small group head。?Theyhad fixed schedules of political meetingsfor members。 They engaged in political study and studied productionproblems。Why would workers want to join?It is advantageous for yourpolitical future。So beginning from school, they want to join。 Youngworkers want to join, because it goes in your dang'an。Thenyougetbetter chances at promotion in the future。This is not a fixed regulation,it just increases your chances。Distributions

Toapplyfor things,the worker writes a report to the shop secretary.The shop leaders discuss it together, then they give their opinion; whetherthey agree to the request or not。‘Then they send it to the plant office.In fact the political work group handled that and gave the final approval.The relief payments were divided into 3 levels, given out quarterly.Actually it was very easy to get relief moneybecause thefactory wantedto spend all its funds because they lost them if they didn't spend themby the end of the period。‘The main1 consideration in reality was renqing;not how hard you worked。TThere wasnofixedregulation。The shop directordiscussessthe matter of relief with the entire shop。1Usually all theydo is say"We're going to give Wu some relief!"andalltheworkerssay"Hao-a!"

That's about the extent of the discussion.

Renqing, this is a non-legal method, a custom of doinggthings。Thereare no fixed rules.But if you violate it， you will suffer。Peoplewi11l oppose you,block you。Workers can slow down if you don't treat them

During the readjustment of the factory, they laid downwithnrenqing。very strict rules for coming to work, fines, job responsibilities, andso forth。But youcan'tt enforce it strictly, or you violate renqing.In our factory we were supposed to stay at our work posts until 5:30.But we'd go in a big group to get our bikes about 5:15, line our bikesup） right at the white line at the factory gate, and when the whistlefinally blows they take off like a race。Why do they let them do this?If you made they stay right to the last minute, you would violate renqingand workers wouldn't like you。In Japanese factories,he hears,theydon't talk about renqing at all, so life in factories there is not socomfortable。They use the collective spirit to oppress the workers.They turn people into strictly regulated beings--singing the factory song:wearingg the same clothes outside of work。Very strict.[Workers aretreated 1ike machines in Japan.If the manager says something in themeeting, they all say "Hai!" in unison.

Chinese factories are much morecomfortable.

Ganqing is different, it is between two people.But renqingis a generalway of treating people as human beings in socity. To satisfy the demandsof ganqing you might sometimes have to violate renqing.

Ganqing will be tothe advantage of the individual, not to all in general.

Ganqing refers to

(4)your personal matters。 If you violate renqing you will have troublegettingthingsdone。

Guanxi:  if I have a wife who sells meat in a store, I can get goodmeat for the shift head and then can use guanxi to get relief paymentsor industrial coupons. But this doesn't necessarily mean we have ganqing.Ganqing might strengthen the guanxi, but you can have guanxi without it.But sometimes the exchange involved in guanxi is more powerful than simpleganqing, because you don't actually receive anything with ganqing.

描述：

