id: 66f6986940
标题：The Center Comments on and Transmits the CCP Supreme People’s Court Leading Party Group’s “Request for Instructions on Paying Close Attention to the Review and Correction of Unjust, False, and Mistaken Cases and Conscientiously Implementing Party Policy”
日期：1978-12-29
是否是时间段：false
作者：中共中央,中共最高人民法院党组
来源：中共中央组织干审局, 干审工作政策文件选编 (上), 799-804
标签：文章
书籍：The Center Comments on and Transmits the CCP Supreme People’s Court Leading Party Group’s “Request for Instructions on Paying Close Attention to the Review and Correction of Unjust, False, and Mistaken Cases and Conscientiously Implementing Party Policy”
书籍作者：中共中央

正文：
# The Center Comments on and Transmits the CCP Supreme People’s Court Party Group’s “Request for instructions on paying close attention to the review and correction of unjust, false, and mistaken cases and conscientiously implementing party policy”

December 29, 1978 – Zhongfa (1978) No. 78

The Center agrees with the “Request for instructions on paying close attention to the review and correction of unjust, false, and mistaken cases, and conscientiously implementing party policy” submitted by the CCP Supreme People’s Court Party Group. We consider this report to be correct; please supervise and encourage the people’s courts and relevant departments in its implementation. During the review process, while we seek to affirm [the nature of] counterrevolutionary cases, we must abide by the instructions of Chairman Mao: “The counter-revolutionaries must be out-and-out and unmistakable ones who completely meet the criteria; we mustn’t wrong innocent people.”[1] We must truly achieve complete reversal where we were completely mistaken, partial reversal where we were partially mistaken, [and] no reversal where we were not mistaken. Law and discipline must be strictly observed and all mistakes must be corrected.

Request for instructions on paying close attention to the review and correction of unjust, false, and mistaken cases and conscientiously implementing party policy (Excerpt)

Party Center:

After the Party Center headed by Chairman Hua shattered the “Gang of Four” with a single blow, people’s courts on various levels followed the spirit of the CCP Central Document (1976) Document No. 23 and, under the leadership of party committees at various levels, they reviewed and revised case after case where punishment had been dealt to those who had opposed Lin Biao and the “Gang of Four” and to those who had decried the injustice of the falsified charges against Vice Chairman Deng. Another group of unjust and mistaken cases was reviewed and revised where, due to the influence of the leftist-in-appearance-rightist-in-reality counterrevolutionary revisionist line of Lin Biao and the “Gang of Four,” the two types of contradictions had been confused. The achievements of this work have been very good, the effects have also been very good… The broad masses, too, have collectively cheered on the revival and development of our party’s fine tradition and code of conduct – to seek truth from facts. They are determined to work diligently and improve production with an even greater enthusiasm and an even greater vigor, as well as to contribute with full force to the realization of the four modernizations.

However, the review and revision of unjust, false, and mistaken cases progresses unevenly. Across the country, the reviews have advanced relatively well, a small number of courts have already basically completed their work; the majority of the courts have already carried out a certain number of reviews and revisions, but they still have a large number of unjust, false, and mistaken cases to review and revise, [and] a small number of courts have yet to act. According to statistics covering the period up to October of this year, the process of reviewing counterrevolutionary cases from the “Great Cultural Revolution” in courts all over the country has reached the following point: Heilongjiang has already reviewed 53 percent, Liaoning 43 percent, Jiangsu 38 percent, Shanghai 30 percent, Fujian 24 percent, Guizhou 21 percent. As a national average, it is estimated that not even one third of cases have been reviewed.

During the “Great Cultural Revolution,” due to the insane pursuit of the leftist-in-appearance-rightist-in-reality counterrevolutionary revisionist line of Lin Biao and the “Gang of Four,” there was confusion as to the relationship between the enemy and us, the practice of obtaining confessions by force was widespread; public security, procuratorate, and legal institutions were smashed and a large part of cadres who had experience with politics and law were driven away, [and] the adjudication process system was abandoned; as a consequence, among the cases that led to conviction, a considerable number belong to the category of unjust, false, and mistaken cases. Among counterrevolutionary cases adjudicated during this period in particular, problems are even more frequent…

From observing the situation of the reviews that are currently carried out by people’s courts at various levels, we have noted the following types of unjust, false, and mistaken cases:

Cases where someone was punished for having opposed Lin Biao and the “Gang of Four” and for having decried the injustice of the falsified charges against Vice Chairman Deng or where someone was punished because of some complaints or incorrect comments uttered – due to a failure to understand the situation of inner struggle within the party – while discussing Lin Biao and the “Gang of Four” and [these comments] were punished as malicious attacks…
Cases where members of the people were punished for counterrevolutionary “malicious attacks” because they – due to dissatisfaction with a certain cadre, the failure to understand a certain party policy, or because individual interests had not been satisfied – had expressed some dissatisfaction with the party, the leadership, and the socialist system in a report to higher authorities or in a personal diary, article, or poem.
Cases where members of the people were punished as active counterrevolutionaries because of some mistaken reactionary expression as a result of neglectful misspelling, shouting of the wrong slogans, or haphazard writing or drawing. Or cases where minors or children were punished for having, due to young age and inexperience, written or drawn reactionary expressions harmful to the party or the socialist system.
Cases where someone with historical issues, who had cooperated and whose case had already received a final verdict that was basically correct, had their old case reopened and were punished during the “Great Cultural Revolution” due to the discovery of some new issues. Cases where someone, due to their bad class background, was punished for “class revenge” during the “Great Cultural Revolution” for having made improper remarks, committed errors, or fought against cadres or the masses.
Cases where the confused speech of someone suffering from a mental illness was punished as a counterrevolutionary crime…

Furthermore, a considerable number of cases were hastily decided after the obtainment of confessions under duress, without conducting any proper investigation and without listening to the explanation of the accused; the result being that these cases contain a complete or basic distortion of the facts.

Presently, the overall attitude of the people’s courts on all levels toward the review and revision of unjust, false, and mistaken cases is one of devoted attention and keen interest. However, there are also numerous issues. The main ones include: lack of understanding of the profound significance of the review and revision of unjust, false, and mistaken cases among some local people’s courts. There is still some lingering fear and considerable anxiety, fear of being labeled as having “rightist thinking,” as “protecting bad people,” as “negating the military control,” as “negating the Great Cultural Revolution” and so on. The fear is that when the next political movement comes they will become the target for attack. Consequently, they do not apply themselves to this work, they do not implement any substantial measures, and they are slow to act. Some comrades that made mistakes while handling or approving cases do not correct them out of fear of being held responsible. There are even some who stand in the way of or hinder the implementation of party policy. Moreover, the limits of the policy of reversal and revision of unjust, false, and mistaken cases is unclear; the courts have few staff and many matters to deal with, and this also contributes to the inability of completing this work promptly.

In order to make further progress, to attend more closely to the review and revision of unjust, false, and mistaken cases, and to implement party policy, our court recently held a National Criminal Adjudication Work Conference in Shanghai. During the conference, the discussion and deliberation of the issue of how to carry out the earnest revision of the cases involving sentences from the “Great Cultural Revolution” was given particular attention. The following consensus was reached.

First, the profound significance of the review and revision of unjust, false, and mistaken cases, and the implementation of party policy, must be fully understood. With regards to party policy and state law, the thorough reversal and revision of unjust cases, false cases, and mistaken cases is an important part in the efforts to expose Lin Biao and the “Gang of Four”; it is an important political task for the implementation of the line put forward by the Eleventh National Congress of the CCP, as well as for the realization of the overarching task of this new era; it is an important aspect of the strengthening of the socialist legal system and the protection of civil rights; it is an important step toward redressing past injustices on the frontline of judicial activity. If this work is carried out well, a reappearance of the vile influence that was the result of inverting the relationship between the enemy and ourselves under Lin Biao and the “Gang of Four” can be avoided; this would benefit the consolidation of the victory of the movement to expose the “Gang of Four.” It would be beneficial to the promotion of stability and unity. It would be beneficial in arousing the enthusiasm of the vast numbers of cadres and the masses to take part in the construction of socialist modernization. We must answer the call of Chairman Hua to “liberate our thinking even more, be even more courageous, use even more methods, walk with even faster steps” and carry out our work even more conscientiously and even more diligently. Comrades who seek truth from facts, who uphold our principles and enthusiastically carry out the work to reverse and revise unjust and mistaken cases, including those comrades who have themselves made mistakes in the handling or approval of cases but who now take the initiative and propose reversal or revision, all deserve praise. As for those comrades who obstruct or oppose the reversal and revision of unjust and mistaken cases, they are to be subjected to criticism and education if they keep to their incorrect ways without reforming, and if the circumstances are serious, they must be severely dealt with.

Second, the policy on the reversal and revision of unjust cases, false cases, and mistaken cases must be earnestly implemented. When reviewing cases, the principle of seeking truth from facts must be upheld, as must the policy that “counter-revolutionaries must be eliminated wherever found, mistakes must be corrected whenever discovered”[2]; all unjust, false, and mistaken cases that were created by the confusion, induced by Lin Biao and the “Gang of Four,” between the enemy and ourselves, are to be revised. The two types of contradictions must be rigorously differentiated and these matters are to be strictly and earnestly handled in accordance with the principle of complete reversal of what is completely mistaken, partial reversal of what is partially mistaken, and no reversal of what is not mistaken.

Those who were punished for having opposed Lin Biao and the “Gang of Four” and for having decried the injustice of the falsified charges against Vice Chairman Deng must be resolutely and thoroughly rehabilitated. As for those who, while opposing Lin Biao and the “Gang of Four” and decrying the injustice of the falsified charges against Vice Chairman Deng, simultaneously made some improper comments, or even made some abusive remarks, their case must be subjected to concrete analysis from a historical, comprehensive perspective. Attention should be paid to their general tendency and their inner nature; we should not let the uttering or the writing of a few mistaken sentences hold us back, or use the suggestion that someone is “impure” as an excuse not to reverse or revise – this is incorrect.

The line between what is a crime and not a crime must be rigorously distinguished. When deciding on counterrevolutionary cases, the instructions of Chairman Mao must be followed: “The counter-revolutionaries must be out-and-out and unmistakable ones who completely meet the criteria; we mustn't wrong innocent people.”[3] It is important to distinguish between those belonging to the masses who, because of their ideological backwardness or their dissatisfaction with some specific event, said or wrote some disgruntled or even abusive words directed against the party, the leadership and the socialist system, and [those who engaged in] propaganda, agitation and sabotage with a counterrevolutionary purpose. People should not casually be labeled as responsible for “malicious attacks” and then hastily punished. When it comes to matters like the shouting of the wrong slogan, confused writings or drawings, unintended damage to a leader’s portrait, the ramblings of people suffering from mental disorders, there is even less reason to treat them as counterrevolutionary acts. Mistakes should not be exaggerated; it is very important that cases determined to involve “malicious attacks,” “counterrevolutionary propaganda,” “counterrevolutionary agitation,” or “counter-revolutionary sabotage” are reviewed and then reversed or revised in accordance with the principle of seeking truth from facts.

As for those with bad class origins or who have ordinary issues when it comes to their political history and who made some improper remarks or mistakes during the “Great Cultural Revolution,” but not enough for these to be considered a crime: if they were punished at the time, they should have their case reversed or revised; their mistakes should be addressed by their unit, which will provide proper instructions and take care of the handling process. As for those who were indeed guilty of criminal offenses, but who confessed their crimes and who were met with understanding from the masses and therefore – in line with the policy of “leniency to those who confess and severity to those who resist” – should not have been punished at the time, their verdicts must also be corrected.

Appeals from individuals implicated in the cases must be treated earnestly. Reasonable appeals that are found, after examination, to belong to the category of unjust and mistaken cases, regardless of whose approval it had and regardless of when the matter was handled, must all lead to reversal or revision; matters must not be left unresolved and weak points should not be taken advantage of. If the original verdict is found to be correct, the appeal is to be overruled and the individual in question should be patiently educated to accept the verdict; bad persons who seize this opportunity to make trouble must be dealt with severely.

Third, under the leadership of the party committees, practical and effective measures are to be adopted to carry out the review work successfully. The people’s courts on all levels must organize sufficient manpower to earnestly review and revise the unjust and mistaken cases. If manpower is lacking, the party committee needs to be informed so that they can transfer personnel and organize specialized teams who will attend closely to the work in progress. In all types of unjust, false, and mistaken cases, the truth of the matter must be uncovered, a plan must be formulated, and the cases must be handled in phases, divided by stages and by group. First, we must take care of major cases, important cases, and model cases of considerable influence. It is important to choose these cases carefully, in order for them to serve as a guide in the progression of the work. For the cases that obviously belong among the unjust cases or the false cases, the review should be attended to promptly, followed by reversal or revision. If the person is still in detention and there is no possibility to review the case immediately, that person should be released first. For a number of major and influential cases, the leading comrades of the people’s courts must handle the cases themselves. Under the unified leadership of the party committees, the people’s courts at all levels must vigorously and earnestly carry this work to its resolution; in accordance with policies and laws of the party and the state, we must strive towards a basic conclusion of the review work within the next year. At that point, the unjust, false, and mistaken verdicts given out by the people’s courts since the “Great Cultural Revolution” should have been revised.

Fourth, after the unjust, false, and mistaken cases have gone through review and revision, it is necessary to coordinate with relevant departments in order to successfully carry out follow-up work. First of all, there should be a coordinated effort among the relevant departments to carry out the victims’ ideological work, to make them face the issue correctly and to concentrate their enmity towards Lin Biao and the “Gang of Four.” An appropriate solution should be provided by the concerned unit’s party organization and administration to former cadres, party members, and employees for concrete issues revolving around such matters as party membership, Communist Youth League membership, work, wages, and household registration. As for those who were not originally in receipt of wages, coordination must be made with the relevant people’s commune or residential district in order to make suitable arrangements. As for people who have a difficult life situation, the particular circumstances must be taken into consideration before reaching a decision. Recently, high level people’s courts in a few provinces, cities, and autonomous regions drew upon their own practical experience to proactively contact departments of the Ministry of Finance, the Ministry of Public Security, the All-China Federation of Trade Unions, the Ministry of Civil Affairs and the Ministry of Labor in order to discuss together and work out a procedure to be implemented following all appeals approved by the party committee. This is very good as it ensures the smooth progression of the follow-up work and thereby the relative satisfaction of the victim and his or her family.

If the report above is found to be appropriate, please refer it to the provincial, municipal, and autonomous regional party committees so that they can see to it that the people’s courts and relevant departments put it into practice immediately.

The CCP Supreme Court’s Party Group

November 30, 1978

Translated by the Maoist Legacy project team

[1] Mao Zedong, “The Relationship between Agricultural Co-operation and the Transformation of Capitalist Industry and Commerce,” October 11, 1955, in Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung: Volume 5 (Beijing: Foreign Languages Press, 1977), 216. Available online at: https://www.marxists.org/reference/archive/mao/selected-works/volume-5/mswv5_46.htm

[2]  Mao Zedong, “On the Correct Handling of Contradictions among the People,” February 27, 1957, Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung: Volume 5 (Beijing: Foreign Languages Press, 1977), 397. Available online at: https://www.marxists.org/reference/archive/mao/selected-works/volume-5/mswv5_58.htm

[3] Mao, “The Relationship between Agricultural Co-operation and the Transformation of Capitalist Industry and Commerce”

描述：

