id: 49fc1c4e44
标题：Hong Kong Interviews: Informant No. 24
日期：1980-4-5,1980-4-7
是否是时间段：false
作者：Andrew G. Walder
来源：
标签：文章
书籍：Hong Kong Interviews: Informant No. 24
书籍作者：Andrew G. Walder

正文：
INFORMANT NO. 24PERSONALDATA

Sex:MaleAge:  43

Technical school graduateEducation:Total Years Relevant Experience:13

Year Left China:1979Last Year of Relevant Experience: l967Initial Immigration Status:Legal

Tianjin native/os ties unknownNative Place/overseas Connections:

unknownClass Background/Political Designation:

OCCUPATIONAL HISTORY SUMMARYPositions Held: 1) Machine Tool Manufacturing Plant, Tianjin, l955-67

a） Shop electrician, gear-making shop, 1955-60b) Asst. Shop Director, gear-making shop, 1960-64

c)Union administrator, Plant Director's 0ffice, 1964-672) Member, Worker Propaganda Team in Tianjin Middle Schools,

1967-723) Public Health Worker, Chinese Traditional Medicine,

Tianjin, 1972-79Administrative Level of Work Unit/(No. of employees):

1) Municipal/(2000)APPOINTMENTS:2

PAGES TEXT:TOTAL HOURS:4

4No.24Occupational History(4/5/80, 2 hrs.)

The informant worked in a Machine Tool Manufacturing Plant in Tianjin

The plant had around 2oo0employees and was administeredfrom 1955-1967.

After graduating from a middle-by a Tianjin Municipal industrial bureau.school level technical school (zhong zhuan) in 1955, he was assigned tothis plant as an electrician.He was an electrician from 1955-1960.In l96o he was promoted to shop director (chejian zhuren), and he did thisjob until 1964.In l964 he was transfered to work in the plant headquartersoffice, directly under the plant director.The office had several peoplewho did administrative work--personnel, welfare, etc.His job was to handleunion administration and personnel.The office was called the 'factoryaffairs office' (chang wu bu), and its job was to assist the plant director,give reports and advice.He did this work until l967.

In l967 he left the factory as a member of a worker propaganda team.His team went to middle schools in the city, and he was very busy doingthis until 1972.1He gave politicaleducation,taught some technica!classesat a technical school (high school level).AAfter l972 they disbanded theworker propaganda teams, but he did not want to return to the plant sincethere was no more work for union officials, and he did not want to bean electrician again.So he asked permission to study and work at aTianjin district public health station.He had studied traditional Chinesemedicine as a child with his father, and was able in l972 to take nightcourses at a public health office.

After that he worked at a districtpublic health hospital, seeing and treating patients, for five years.He left legally for Hong Kong in l979.Wages

While he was working as an electrician, his chief job was to repairelectrical breakdowns on the production line, and to install things.1Hehad graduated from technical middle school, so there was no apprenticeshipperiod for him.He was first a grade one worker at 32¥ after he graduated.After one year, he was given a raise according to regulations to grade 2,36¥。1He was raised to grade 3 in l957, in his third year of work, andmade 39¥.Then he was promoted to shop director. He kept his grade 3 workerwages for one year, then changed to cadre wage. In the l963 wage readjustmenthe was formallyY changed to a grade 2l administrative cadre, and was givena raise to 62¥.

There were wage readjustments in 1956--a biggone--a small one in 1959for a limited number of enterprises, and one in 1963. After this things didnot change for over l0 years.(Once the CR started, there were no wagechanges until 1978.Bonuses

They had quarterly bonuses before the CR, but had no monthly bonus.Each quarter the small group would meet to assess workers for bonuses.They separated themselves into 3 grades, based on work attitude, numbersof days of leave, etc.The amounts were l5， l0,aand 5¥. About 40% ofthe workers would get a bonus. Most of this 40% got grade 2 (l0). Thisbonus system was abolished in 1967.AAftertheCR(hewasnotintheplantthen）1 many factories switched to supplementary wages where everyone got thesame amount and they were not sorted into 3 groups.There was no way togive bonuses out because the center wouid not allow it.Workers tended tolike the supplementary wages better, because they don't waste time appraisingin meetings and there is less chance of an unfair appraisal, and no arguments

-1-every monthover 2-3¥ of bonus.Temporary and Contract Workers

They did not ordinarily employ these kinds of workers unless they were

They would be invited from the city orbuildingJ an addition to the factory.from the countryside, and they had both temporary and contract workers.

They got contract workers from the communes,TheywerenotfactoryI workers.and signed a contract specifying length of service and type of work.Therewere very few of these kinds of workers.

They also did odd jobs (zagong), and whatever types of small repairsneeded to be done.These people were employed not within shops but outsidethe shop structure, by the entire plant.There is an opportunity for thesepeople to become regular employees, but this is rare.As far as he knows,they never abolished this system of contract labor.Firings, Discipline

No workers were ever demoted or fired for bad work in his experience.If some worker is doing a bad job, they try to understand the objectivereasons, and talk with the person, find out what is wrong. If he is arepeated offender, they might have the person make an account of himselfin a small group meeting.1In his own shop, no one was ever fired, demoted,or transfered as punishment-- during the entire 1955-67 period.The Gear Manufacturing Shop, 1955-64

(4/7/80, 2 hrs.)

He worked in a gear-making shop (chi lun chejian) which had over200 workers.1His first job there was as the shop electrician, to repairelectrical equipment within the shop.He maintainedthe electricalsystem.They had a place to take broken equipment to work on but this was not reallyan office, just a place to work.

There were three electricians in all.They also had 3 technical workers who repaired machinery. These 6 people com-prised a 'repair group'.There were 3 of each kind of skilled worker becauseoneworkedoneachofthreeshifts.The shop director makes surethat there is at least one of each type of repair worker for a shift, Soproduction does not have to stop for repairs.The group was under thedirection of the shop director.

There was also a repair shop (weixiu chejian) which was all-plantin nature, and which handled machinery and equipment repairs which were moreserious and complex, and which could not be handled by the repair groupsof the shops.

The repair shop made spare parts from raw materials, anddis-assembled and repaired machines.How to decide if a factory shouldhave a repair shop?First, you have to have the space.  Second, you have tohavethee equipment, and kinds of machinery necessary to make parts.Third,you have to have people with these technical skills, and fourth, you haveto have the raw materials. Small factories don't have these conditions anddon't need to set up repair shops.Repair groups in the shops can usuallyhandle  their problems.

Shop structure:

There was a director and two vice-directors.Theseleaders handled all leadership work.They needed no technicians or otherexperts to help them with this.The directors worked mostly on the shopfloor.The only paperwork they had to do was to fill out the daily productionreport, which was basically to add up all the forms handed in by small groupleader and vice-leaders, who did most of the assist work in shop management.The shop director was usually! concurrently the party branch secretary.The2 vice-shop directors usually handled most production work. TThe shop directorcalled lots of meetings to handle problems.

-2-The shop director's main job was to oversee overall production process,

The vice-directors rotatedand to oversee people's ideological thought.

The shop director does not rotate shifts, just works days.on the 2 shifts.They had one person（yuan）1responsible for health (first aid) and alsostatistics.He was the one who added up the forms and reports.

They alsohad a part-time person like a propagandist (xuanchuan yuan), who was writing,talking, and who was a worker who used off-hourss to help with ideological

They held a lot of meetings, for lots of purposes.Productionwork.problems, planned birth, political campaigns, etc.

These were the shopdirector's responsibility to oversee.

Below the shop were several production groups.

They had group leadersand vice leaders.They are both full-time workers.Not necessarily partymembers.They did not need any technicians or inspectors in the smallgroups.The group0 leader was experienced and should know these things.If he didn't, he had no business being the group leader.

The group

to set production plans and make arrangementsleader's responsibilities were:for the day, to decide how long to have to produce certain parts beforebeing finished;

to have forms on the completion of quotas and productionsituationfilledouteveryday.

They use off-hours for this.

Sometimes there were meetings after shifts with the shop directorto discuss plan. completion, tasks, technical questions about the productionof certain items.

The group leader's job is to meet with and explain, talkthings over with workers, find out whether they.can work overtime, etc.

Ifthere are disagreemtns with workers, or expected problems in convincingworkers to do something, they work especially hard at these talks.

For example, when they call meetings to'introduce tasks' (jieshaorenwu), to tell workers of pressing production matters, they first contactthe party members and youth league memebers and explain the policyand

The job of the party members is to help convincetheproblemtothem.other workers.1But when introducing tasks, asking for overtime, theyneed meetings also to explain the reasons to workers.If they don't do thiskind of ideological work, things won't work out.They can't just sti inthe office and give orders. So the shop director/branch secretary's jobis very busy.

He has to continuously combine ideological work with productiontasks.

This is important in the case of overtime because there.is no basicovertime wage, although some plants have small overtime supplements.Someplaces did have basic overtime wages in the past, but they were abolishedlater.Generally, people were to work overtime because it: was a politicalresponsibility (renwu).The CYL members were quite willing to be activistsin overtime work because they wanted to join the Party.They wanted to beselected advanced workers6(xianjin gongzuozhe).

There is

The group leader also is responsible for quality inspection.alsoa qualityiinspection in the factory's storeroom (canku).1Bigger plantshad Quality 1Inspection Departments (jianyan ke).

Therewasneverany'5 personnel'(wu da yuan)ssystem in his factory as farC as he can remember.Some plants used this, but not all of them implemented this kind of system.This is true for other policies too.1For example, now they are saying thatfactories should implement the Yugoslav method.But this is only inexperimental plants.Manyleaders have not been ordered to implement this.You can't really tell what the method is by reading newspaper articles.So factories find it hard to carry it out, and just wait for concreteorders from above.How do you implement bonuses, how to carry out electionsaccording to this new method?It is hard to say just byI reading the papers.Also, will a plant director be willing to be removed from his job in anelectinn if the plant is unprofitable?

-w-Great Leap Forward

There were no major changes in plant organization during the GreatLeapForward, at least within the shops.But theydidsend groupsof tech-nicians from the departments to work alongside the workers and learn aboutactual conditions, about technology and about the machines.Manyofthemknew how to draw diagrams, but really did not understand the machines.So they went on a rotating basis, but did not have fixed production assign-ments.They did try to make steel for a while, but this wasn't that bigof a change for the factory， as compared to a school or a commune.In theseunits' they stopped studying or planting to do this. But in the factorythe biggest change was that they didn't go home at night to rest, they justkept working to either produce more machines or work on the steel furnacethey built.Assistant Shop Director's Responsibilities

Why was he selected for this promotion? He does not know for surehimself.He got along very well with others in the shop. Also, he was amember of the shop's basketball team, and was pretty good. A lot of peopleliked basketball in his shop.iAfter promotion, his wages stayed the sameuntil the next wage readjustment, when he was raised a bit, but not +hatmuch.  But he was switched at this time to the administrative cadre scale.

His job:if there was propaganda work to do, he did this; if he hadto write slogans, he did this; if they had to hold a meeting of any sort,he did this.(Generally, he did whatever he had to do to get productiondone. If there are any problems of any sort in the groups that they need ahigher-up to decide or solve, he would go dowm and talk the problem overwith them, and try to arrive at a solution.  Also they would relay respon-sibilitiestothegroupD leaders.

Some days production would go smoothly.Other days there were allkinds of problems.Then you would be real busy.

There could be a problemof any sort--meeting the quotas, monthly output, quality, etc. The workwas very flexible in nature, and he did a wide variety of coordinatingtypes of work.Plant Office

There was a secretary, typist, and a person who did liason work withthe departments. There were other staff members with substantive responsibil-ities. There was one person for the union (himself), one person for technicalmatters, one for security, and the three others. He was promoted to thisoffice because he was very active in union activities--basketball team,acting troupes, etc.

And he took an active part in union meetings.Thegeneral task of this office was to handle communication with the departments,give orders, hear problems when the plant director was not available.Thework of the union was livelihood, labor welfare, insurance, and after-workactivities.

During the middle of the CR he was selected toobeamemberofthe worker propaganda team which was sent to schools, since he had a workerbackground and a certain cultural level. Orders came from above to establishthe team and send them out, so he went. As it turned out, he never returnedto the factory to work.

-4-

描述：

