id: 7eb15c5014
标题：Hong Kong Interviews: Informant No. 25
日期：1980-4-1,1980-4-2,1980-4-4
是否是时间段：false
作者：Andrew G. Walder
来源：
标签：文章
书籍：Hong Kong Interviews: Informant No. 25
书籍作者：Andrew G. Walder

正文：
INFORMANT NO. 25PERSONAL DATA

Sex:MaleAge:45Education:Technical school graduate, Industrial college graduate (night school

25Total Years Relevant Experience:

Year Left China:1979Last Year of Relevant Experience: l979Initial Immigration Status: LegalNative Place/Overseas Connections:

Thailand 0S/returned 1950Class Background/Political Designation:

OS

OCCUPATIONALHISTORYSUMMARYPositions Held: 1) Harbin Tool Factory, 1955-59

a) Shop technician (work supervisor), 1955-57

b) Staff technician, Design Department, 1958-592) Technician, Canton Machine Tools Research Institute,

1959-79Administrative Level of Work Unit/(No. of employees):

1） unknown/(2800)

2) Ministry until 1972, then Municipal/(l000)Experience in Full-time Manual Labor (for non-worker occupations):

none mentionedAPPOINTMENTS:3

PAGES TEXT:7TOTAL HOURS:6No.25Occupational History (4/l/80, 2.25 hrs.)

The informant is an overseas Chinese from Thailand, who returned toChina in 1950.In l955 he graduated from a middle-school level technicalschool in Changchun, Jilin Province. In l955 he was assigned to theHarbin Tool Factory, where he worked as a shop technician until l959.He worked during thee day in the factory as a shop technician, laterhe did some designing work in the design department.While in the shop he wasa project supervisor (shigong yuan, a loose translation), which was theperson in the shop who was responsible for going around the shop0 to translatediagrams and industrial drawings into concrete production measures.1Healso was in charge of solving technical and safety problems which popped up.Later, around 1958-59, he was sent to the designing department (sheji ke)as a designer.

During this period he studied at night school at Harbin IndustrialUniversity, and transfered his credits to Canton when he was later transferedin 1959. He finally got his university degree in l962.In 1959, he wastransferedtotheCantonMachineResearchInstitite.Their work at thistime was to copy plans for soviet machines.(Generally, their tasks was toimprove on existing machine designs and to develop new kinds of machines.He was a group head, the leader of one of the many7research groups into whichthe institute was divided. He led the group in investigations, innovation,investigation reports, and re-designing work. The actual prototypes wouldbe given to either the workshop attached to the institute or to various mach-inery plants throughout the country.

He did this work until he left legallyin July 1979.

The research institute originally was under the #l Machine BuildingMinistry (as was his Harbin factory).Thus they travelled to other machineplants throughout the country within the ministry's system.The  unit wassent down to be run by Canton City around l972 as part of the 'xiafang' tolocal government, and only in l979 was it restored to the #l Machine BuildingMinistry system.During the period when it was under the leadership of thecity of Canton, the number of plants he visited inside Canton increasedgreatly.  It was difficult to cross administrative system boundaries becauseyou needed to arrange letters of infroductions at higher levels.Wages

When he was first sent to the plant, he was a practicing (jianxi) tech-nician for one year at 36¥.TThe technical school graduates were separatedinto 3 grades after this: grade 16, 40.5, grade 15, 46¥, grade 14, 53¥.This depended on performance during the first year. They discussed theperformance of the practicing technicains in the groups, but the finaldecision about their promotion was made by higher levels. MMost were set atgrade 15. TThese 3 grades were called assistant technicians.  He was personallyset at grade 14. 0ther grades for technicians: 10, 96¥, grade 1l, 82.5¥,grade 12, 69¥, grade 13, 6l ¥. Grade 10 was the highest technician,and grade l3 the lowest. These were called 'technicians' and sometimescalled grade l, grade 2 technicians, etc, according to whether you weregrade l0, ll, etc.

There were regional differentials.WhenhemovedtoCantonhekeptthe same grade but was given an immediate raise of 5.1After completinguniversity studies in l962, he was raised to grade ll.

In 1978 he waspromoted to be an engineer, but without engineers pay.

This was supposedto come later.

-1-

So his raise history went as follows: In 1955 he was given 36? asa practicing technician.  In l956 he was made assistant technician (zhuanzheng), at grade 14, or 53¥. In 1959 he was raised to be a grade 13technician, 6l, and in 1963 he was promoted up to grade ll, at 82.5 ￥.When he left in 1979, he was still making 82.5, where he was put in1963. He says that if he stayed, he today would be paid a grade 9 engineerswage，over loo¥.Wage Readjustments

In l956 was the wage reform.  In l96l there was a small readjustment,about 20% of the employees. In 1963 there was another one like l96l,where raises were based on political performance and technical level,work performance.But the criteria were vague, and there was no testing.This was generally decided by the leader's impression toward you. Beforedeciding, though, they would put nominees names on a board and ask for themasses opinions.  If there is no major problem, they would promote.

Then there were no readjustments until l977, when they set fairlyclear criteria based on wage level and years of service.They had notstarted the 1979 round of raises when he left in July.1For a long timepeople were promoted but not given raises.  Many people had been stuckat assistant technician level since 1963 and weren't raised until 1979.

The influence of this on workstyle and activism was naturally verylarge, especially among lower paid workers.The general influence was thatpeople were not spurred voluntarily on their: own initiative to undertakeresponsibilities.People would do things if you ordered them to and contin-ually watched them work, but they lacked initiative.1People gradually， overtime, became less willing to participate in part-time night technicalclasses because there would be no reward for them.Bonuses

They had piece work in the factoryduring 1955-59 while he was there.People were paid strictly according to output.They also tried this fora while in the designing department, but since it was hard to set timestandards for this kind of work, they later changed to monthly bonusesseparated into 3 grades.TThis piece rate system was also referred toas the 'bao gong zhi'. In the shops, the quota clerk (ding e yuan) setthe time quotas for pieces, and the statistician (tongji yuan) kept strictrecords of individual output.These were used to calculate wages.Temporary and Contract Labor

There were very few, if any employed in his plant in Harbin.Therewere many in Canton, mostly dependents of employees.Firings, Discipline

There were no firings in the Harbin plant, but they did have punishments.One technician made mistakes in designing work, but he also had a 'historicalproblem'.They put him in jail for l-2 years.Whenhereturnedtotheplanthe was given a lower wage and work position.They also had a vice-directorwho messed with women, and was discipline by the Party and transfered. Ifsomeone's work was poor, they would talk with him. If he didn't change afterrepeated problems, they still would not fire him, but just not give thempromotions and wages.The Gear-cutting Tool Shop, 1955-58 (4/2/80, 2.25 hrs.)

The Harbin Tools Plant had about 28o0 workers.  The shop he worked inas a technician produced tools for cutting gears (chi lun daoju), and had

-2-about 300 workers.They had four sections in the shop, each for producing

Each section had its own production linea different cutting tool.

They would take long steel rods, cut them into different(liushui xian).length sections, then drill a hole through the center, then make differentcuts for gears, etc.Each small group would perform different processesalong the way, and would work with different machines.This organizationcontrasts with the technical shop and tools shop, which repaired andrenovated machines,rmade tools,respectively.

Theydid not have a productionline organization.

In the shop office was the director and one vice director.

Shop office:The director was responsible for overseeing the entire plant operation, andwas usually a party member.The vice-director emphasized welfare, liveli-hoodmatterswithin1 the shop, and most of these people are also partymembers.There was aa'planner'（(jihua yuan) who0assisted the shopp directorand handled production planing.

This person divided up the plans given by

The statisticisn (tongji yuan) figuresthe plant and plans production.up production statistics after each day, and busies himself figuring uppiece work of each worker.He works closely with the planner, and is also

There is also an office helper ((banshi yuan) ,the shopD director's assistant.who does odd jobs and errands.

This was the administrative office of the shop.

Below it therewass another office, called the 'technical group' (jishi zu).This washeaded bythe grouphead, a materials quota man (cailiao ding e yuan),a time quota man(gongshi cding e yuan), and 3-4 production supervisors(shigong yuan).The materials person fixes consumption quotas for materialsuse for a certain amount of products, and acceptable rates for waste products.The time quota person sets time quotas for the amount of time to finisha specific operation.This wassvery important at that time because they useda piece rate system at that time.He figures in the time for the actualwork, rest periods, etc, and tries to settle on an average standard.Thenthey had a number of production supervisors which corresponded to the numberof products (sections) in the shop.

Each one would be responsible for helpingto solve technical problems with equipment or product standards encounteredduring production.

Party Branch Office: There was a party branch office in each shop.They manage the party members and ideological education and thought ofevery person in the shop.

They have a branch party secretary, separatedfrom production, and also a vice-branch secretary, who is not separatedfrom production..There is also a secretarial worker (mishu) who does paperwork in the branch office.Normally, the party and administrative organsare separate and do different kinds of work.The party handles partymembers, and administration handles production.But since the shop directoris almost always a party member,he is in actuality also under partyleadership.Quality Inspection System

There was also an inspeetion station (jian cha zhan) in the shop, whichhad its own place or shed, on the shop floor--but no office. TThis stationwas not under shop leadership but directly under the leadership of the QualityInspection Department (jiancha ke).1Usually there were 5-6 people in it,technical workers.Theyare under the leadership of the department,sotheyworkK on department orders, and do inspection work and make reports.They had the power to accept and reject products according to their speci-fications.

There was an underlying contradiction and bargaining process between

-3-the shop director and the workers in the inspection system. T

The directorclaimed that the specifications were too stringent given the state of theequipment. The shop director would often argue about product standardsbeing enforced too closely. But the workers in the inspection stationwere under the leadership of the department, so any @disagreemtns would haveto be taken to the department themselves.

There was also the Same kind of contradiction between the inspectionworkers and the production workers.  If a worker's work was judged to besub-standard, this reduced the output for figuring the piece rate, and alsoincreased the wastage rate (feipin lu), which, if too high, would adverselyaffect chances for bonuses, and also would adversely affect shop-level plancompletion. So often low-level disagreements, and bargaining took placebetween inspectors and workers over a micrometer here and a micrometer there.If an inspector got along with a worker well (guanxi hao), then he might lethim get away with borderline cases.

Inspection methods: One method is not to inspect every single piece,but to pull out every xth one to give a close inspection.Another method isto spot check in production groups,inspecting things while still in the groups,and telling the worker involved that it is sub-standard.Sometimes thiskind of inspection took place right as a piece comes off the lathe, and ifthe piece is not up to par they stop the worker and get him to change hiswork method.

During the Great Leap, the inspection stations were sent dowm (xiafang)to the shop director's leadership, and after that no contradiction or dis-agreements, arguments took place.The technical worker after this would justlisten to the shop director's orders, would revise the standards slightlywhen the shop director wanted, or the shop director would simply overrulethe inspection worker's judgments about up-to-standard products. This hada great influence on quality at that time.There were also a number ofdesign personnel sent dowm to the shop during the Great Leap--more on thislater.

Shop Technical and Inspection System

QUALITY INSPECTIONPARTY BRANCH

DEPARTMENTSHOP DIRECTOR'S OFFICE

INSPECTION STATION

SECTION CSECTION A

TECHNICAL GROUP

SECTION BGreat Leap Forward

Many administrative jobs were sent down to the shops. Most of thepersonnel from the departments were sent down to work in shop offices,under the leadership of the shop director--in addition to the inspectionstation which also goes to the shop.TThe reason for this was because theseoffice people were out of touch with actual conditions, and only wanted tocopy foreign experiences, and did not understand actual conditions in theirown plants.

The result of all of this was bad. We have already discussed theproblem with inspection. The same thing was true for designing work. Thedesigners were sent to the shops and pressure was put on them to revise diagrams

-4-and designs, lower standards for acceptable variation in size, measurements,smoothness of surfaces, etc.1If the technicians sent down argued againstthis, the shop director or Party secretary wouldiaccusethemof beingcutoff from actual conditions, no understandingtheeactual process of production,setting unreasonably high standards, worshipping things foreign.Thismade technicians intimidated and they would usually comply.what couldthey answer back?To not comply would be asking for punishment and criticism.

Also there were the technical specialistss(gongyii yuan) sent down fromthe technical department (gongyi ke).Influences on their work was not asgreat as for others mentioned, but there was some.These people would setprocessing methods of a particular product--the techniquefor producingproducts up to standards set by the designers.If a shopdirector wantedan easier, faster， or lower cost method of production to be used, he couldprevail upon the technical personnel to approve and help devise waysdespite his doubts that an up-to-standard product could be produced in thisway.

Production Changes:

They cancelled the piece rate system, and switchedto time rates.There was a lot of overtime work, sometimes several nightswithout sleep, and there was overtime all the time with no extra pay.

Thiswas because they were to put politicsin command.They never had piece

Of course, output increased, but qualityrates again after the Great Leap.decreased.

At that time, workers were exhausted, working several nights withoutsleep.

They built an iron smelting furnace to melt dowm waste iron, butoften they took pieces of iron that were not actually waste. But the ironthey made was of no use.It was more like bean curd. lBut if anyone raisedthis criticism theycould be labelled a rightist.A number of technicianswere criticized for objecting to these methods. But they gave up this ironmaking after a little over a month.

The biggest changes in management system within the shop were thepowers and personnel 'sent down' (xiafang) to the shops. Within the shops,there were no great changes that he recalls.There was no further xiafangto sections or small groups of the powers of personnel.

This was later,during the cultural revolution.

In his own work there were no great changes during the Great Leap.Of course, he cooperated with section and group leaders, and had discussionswith concerned workers on how to solve technical problems, but this was nodifferent than what he had done before.Research Institute in Canton, 1959-79(4/4/80, 1.5 hrs.)

The research institute was one for research on the design of machinery.The research tasks were set by the ministry in Peking.They would visitplants to examine machines that have already been produced by the ministry'splants, and which have developed quality problems.The technicians wouldvisit the factories to check out performance. Another job was for theinstitute to try tomake improvements in design to bring machines up to worldstandards.

The institute had looo personnel, about 400 of whom were technicians,and also a number of leading cadres.They had party committee, secretaries,Union, Youth League, and administrative cadres who handled welfare, accounting,food, housing, etc.

Then there

There were about 300 administrators in all.were about 3-400 workers.They had their own small factoryy for casting parts;forging parts, processing them, tooling, turning, assembly, etc.

They builtprototypes (yangpin).

Their products were outside the state plan.

Thefactory was completely contained within the institute and did only research-related production.

-5-

The institute's work was divided into several groups (zu). Each groupstudied a different problem.lNormally, the institute was funded by theministry. But during the CR everything was in disarray, and nobody handledit, and very little work got done.Then in 1972 they sent the researchinstitutedowmtoCityadministration..After that, responsibility forsupporting research went to the institute itself, so it began to use itsworkshops for turning out products for sale to earn money, and they turnedthe machines over to the ministry.Then after the Gang of 4 fell, theyrestored Ministry leadership, and the Ministry once again funded theirresearch.

The biggest and most widespread kind of technical problem he foundin his years ofEtravellingaroundoninspections of different plants wasthat the parts of the machine tools would heat up when used, and thendue to pressure would change shape.1Later, parts turned out on thesemachine tools would be slightly bent, or not up to standard in other ways.Precision would be lost.Cultural Revolution

They had even more political movements in the research institutethan in the factories, because they didn't directlyupset production.Inl964aworkteamforthe'4 cleans movement' was (dispatched to theinstitute..It held meetings, got people to put up posters, and investi-gated others. ?They came in and investigated people with historicalproblems, corruption, ideological problems.

But not that many peoplewere criticized.

At the beginning of the cultural revolution, people began puttingup wall posters and making criticisms.Later, 2 factions organized andbegan to argue among themselves.Theysplitover whether or not toknockdown the Institute director (suo zhang) or the Party secretary. One factionwas a majority

faction, mostlyI technicians and workers.Another factionwasssmaller, made up of administrative cadres, and party cadres.

Why did they split up this way?The technicians were intellectualswho had often gotten bad teeatment, criticism during past politicalcampaigns.Workers generally sympathized with the technicians because theyalso could be criticized.But workers also split into two groups--peoplewho were leaders, group heads, etc.; aand normal workers.The workers inleading position tended to side with the administrative and political cadres.The people in this faction had escaped criticism duringthe previouscampaigns.They were the conservatives (dongfeng--east wind).TThey wantedto pull down the institute director，aand support the party secretary,whilethe rebels were just the opposite.

The groups armed them-

Finally, both leading cadres were knocked down.selves and there was fighting in the streets.  NNobody guarded the storehousesin the city government where rifles were stored, and groups broke in andtook them.For one year from 1967 to early 1968, virtually no work was done.People rarelyI came to work.

Later, worker-army propaganda teams came to the research institute. Inname, they were there to creat a 'great alliance', but in reality those whocame to his institute arrested the leaders of the radical 'red flag' factionand suppressed its organization.The membership dispersed.  Theywerecalledcounter-revolutionaries..After this, the masses were afraid to continue torebel, and fell quietly into place. TThen they could establish the revolutionarycommittee.

The PLA led the whole process.

The people from the radical faction wereimprisoned for half a year, and later it was discovered that they weren'tcounter-revolutionary, but a mass organization which had not made serious

-6-mistakes.They came back, but not without resentments. They had been re-pressed, while the other faction had won and had become officials in theinstitute. So for the following period these old resentments were stillstrong, and influenced work within the institute.Factionalism after the Cultural Revolution

So for the following period these old resentments were still strong,and influenced work in the institute.This exists right up to today.It is very difficult to counter this by central policies, and to thoroughlycarry out the cadre policy in each locality. Factionalism blocks it.

How did this factionalism come out?  First, in social relatinns.Leadersfrom one faction did not think highly of others, and didn't respect theothers.SSecond, the youth from one faction were (given preference in pro-motions, and many were promoted to leadership position.When older cadrescameback，there wereproblems.Generally，thesekinds of ties beeamea major vehicle, not ability, whereby you were promoted, got preferentialjob assignments, etc.

This lack of unity generally damaged cooperative relations recessaryfor handling work well. This problem still hasn't been completely solvedtoday.There are still a lot of people whoare not convinced about thenew political trends, and who just said whatever they were told by the upperlevels. They would criticize both the Gang and also Deng, regardless ofwhat they really thought.After the death of Mao

After the Gang of 4 fell they didn't have any demotions, or criticisms,because everyone jumped in to criticize the Gang of 4, and no one would

Hefeels that they are carryingacknowledge having supperted them in the past.out the process of rooting out these people at the top--on the CentralCommittee--and he points to Wu De, Wang Dongxing, and Hua Guofeng asexamples.:Later this will filter down to the bottom.  But this is verydifficult, and will take a long time.

A big problem in the industrial system at present, he volunteers, isthat distribution according to labor is a principle that is hard to carryout in technical work. It is hard to stimulate work enthusiasm of technicalcadres. 1Bonuses for 7o% creates resentment by the other 30% who don't getthem, especially since most people are at about the same level.They alsohave to split these 7o% into grades.SSo while discussing and appraisingfor bonuses creates arguments, and strains on relations within the workgroup, it turns lax labor attitudes into active dissatisfactions.  Sodistribution according to work is a difficult thing to carry out.  If theyused tests and set scores linked to bonuses, there would be no way to argue,but the face-to-face appraisal creates problems.

~7-

描述：

