id: 6c5ac93794
标题：Hong Kong Interviews: Informant No. 62
日期：1980-7-5,1980-7-7,1980-7-12,1980-7-19,1980-7-26
是否是时间段：false
作者：Andrew G. Walder
来源：
标签：文章
书籍：Hong Kong Interviews: Informant No. 62
书籍作者：Andrew G. Walder

正文：
INFORMANT NO. 62

PERSONAL DATAAge:41

Sex:Male

Industrial college graduate (electrical equipment)Education:

17Total Years Relevant Experience:

Year Left China: 1979Last Year of Relevant Experience: l979Initial Immigration Status:LegalNative Place/Overseas Connections:Malaysia 0S, returned 1954Class Background/Political Designation:OS

OCCUPATIONAL HISTORY SUMMARYPositions Held:  1) Chemical Fertilizer Plant, Canton, l963-79

a) Technician, Assistant Section Chief, power plant,

1963-66, 1969-79

b) repair worker, 1967-68Administrative Level of Work Unit/(No. of employees):

1) Ministry, Province after 1966/(@1000+)Experience in Full-time Manual Labor (for non-worker occupations):

worker in shops, 1967-68APPOINTMENTS:

TOTAL HOURS:14

PAGES TEXT: 155No.62Occupational History

(7/5/80, 2.5 hrs.)The informant is an overseas Chinese, born in Malaysia in l939.

Hereturned to Hong Kong in l954 to study at lower middle school.Then in1956 he went to China to complete upper middle school.

He graduated in1959 and tested into a university, where he studied in1theelectricalequipment and machinery (jidian) department. This was in a MetallurgyCollegee(xueyuan) run by the metallurgy ministry and it was in the north.In their first year they studied chemistry, mechanics, and electronics.As time went alongthe program became more focused oni:the subject ofelectrical machinery and electrical systems for production equipment--designing, theory procedures for producing it.To graduate they had tcdesign a machine--this was their equivalent of the senior essay.

Theydivided the results into three grades, and gave different names, kind oflike graduating with different levels of honors.But when they got theirwork assignments, they all got the same wage.

He was assigned in l963 to the largest Chemical Fertilizer factory inCanton Municipality.

When he first went there, it was under the ChemicalMinistry in Peking.1In l966 the plant was sent down to Guangdong Province.After that the ministry continued to give 1plans and set the size of theirlabor force.The province could also add responsibilities and give additionalsupplies for local use.But the province, when it added responsibilities,could not supply all the spare parts and materials, equipment to producethese new things, because the province didn't have them.

Sofromthattime forward the plant started to grow, aand the machinery shopwastheonethat grew the most--from the production of pig iron to tooling of spareparts, it had to make all its own parts that the province could not supply.The moneyto expand the shopcame from the renovation funds fromi:theministry, and funds from the province for: 'technical reform'.

When he first went to the eelectrical equipment shop (dianqi chejian),it included two sections (gongduan).The first was the electrical powersection, which included the electrical generation plant, and the second wasthe electrical repairs section, which handled the repair and maintenance ofall the electrical equipment and motors.The repair section was the repaircenter for the entire plant, and would only be dispatched for relativelybig problems which the production shop repair workers and electricians couldnot solve.Sometimes they couldn't solve the problems, and this was usuallybecause they needed a part but could not get it or make it, either becauseit was very big or very important.

So they would try to make do with othermachines, or come up with some sort of innovation or substitute part to getthe machin running again.But sometimes machines6lay idle while waitingfor parts, but not long, because they had to find some way to keep themachine running.

He was the assistant section head (fu gongduan zhang), and at the sametime he was a technician.

He was in charge of power plant operations.Thesection head handled only administration, and he did not understand thebusiness of electrical generation systems.Theriinformant was the assis-tant section head after his first year, right up until the cultural revo-lution, when he did two years of manual labor as a worker, then after theCR he was a technician again, but not a section leader.He did this untilApril 1979, when he came legally to Hong Kong.Wages

During his first year of work, he was a practicing (jianxi) technicianand made 5l¥ which was equivalent to a grade l5 technician.

After one year-1-he was made regular (zhuanzheng), and assigned to grade l3, 6l¥. He didnot receive another raise until l977, when he was raised tograde 12， 68¥.

Readjustments:

They had a regular system of promotions6 and readjust-ments until l963, and after that it was cancelled.

Then in 1197l, afterLin Biao died, they had a readjustment for workers only, based solelyon years of service, except if one had a political problem.

Before 1963,they had a regular testing system with standards for each promotion level,and based their wage readjustments on this.

There were no promotions or raises until 1977, when they raised 60%of the people in the plant.They had criteria both for years of service andwage level, and also assessed in groups.  1But there were problems in theassessment meetings because there were so many people who were eligiblewhose performance was about the same--howcould you separate them?

Thisgave rise to big arguments, real struggles.

They based the group assessmentson ability, but did not test people because so many people hadn't studiedfor over lo years--how could they take tests?  They mostly relied on yearsof service and work contribution, but years of service was more important.Those units in the factory who had more workers who met year-lines couldgive raises to a higher percentage of workers.

When they assessed in their groups. each person first: spoke about them-selves, their abilities, the year they entered the plant, etc.1Afterwardsthey would begin comments on each person, and then nominate.Oftenit happenedthat they nominated too many people in the group, so the name list wouidbe pared back by a wage committee at the shop level, which had representativesfrom each production group which were elected by the groups.These repre-sentatives were not necessarily the group leaders, and also union andwomen'sfederationofficialswouldsitonthese

committees.They wouldthen take out people who had some problems, either in work or behavior,or who had applied to go the Hong Kong.

Then shops sent a modified list up the the factory level, and they lookin the personal files to see if there is any reason not to (give a personaraise.Then they released a list of nominees for discussion by the massesagain.They didn'tcare how much time it took to assess because all the

This was a real headache, peopleraises were retro-active toJuly l.argued all the time, mainly because people were discussing one another inthe open, when their: performances were all at about the same level.But only60% of those who met the year lines could be raised.So people began toargue over what precise year they entered the factory.

Before 1963, they had regular tests for technical skills to see if youcould meet grade 2,3, or 4 standards for your work specialty.There wasno necessary relation to raises.The result of the test would be used asjust one criteria for raises when the next readjustment came. Now theyhave started to give tests again, but thiss won't work very well becausethere are so many people who did not studyor practice to iimprove technicalskills for over lo years, because this6wasthe'whiteexpert road'.Sotheyhave forgotten much of their skills from disuse and lack of continuingstudy.If you tested these people now, they would certainly fail.

(7/7/80, 2.5 hrs.)Bonuses

The bonus system they had before the CR was a 'point competition' (baifen

They assessed people according to different criteria--work con-jingsai).tribution, output, quality， attendance， etc.But there were areas whereit was difficult to assign points.

If you all were about the sameeinthe group, how could you give different points?

They gave points afterassessments in small groups. So this gave rise to arguments--if no one in

-2-the group causes accidents, how can you separate them?  So there werestill difficulties. After adding up the points, they would drawlines and separate into 3 grades individually within a group.Thesewere the monthly bonuses.

There were also several individual (danxiang) bonuses, which werefor outstanding performances over the year.There was a full attendance(quanqin) bonus, which is for someone who took no leaves during the year,and never came in latee or left early.This was about lo+. Therewas a 'safe production bonus' given to all members in a small group withoutaccidents for the entire year.Each person would get 20-30￥, but thiswas very hard to get and it was very rare.They had a technical reformbonus, for making successful technical improvement suggestions.Theyhad a cleanliness bonus, given to residents in unit housing with the cleanest

They give small gifts for this one--drinking glasses,dormitory room.notebooks.

The monthly bonus in fact had nine different grades, because they sep-arated shops into 3 grades, and groups into 3 grades, depending on theircompletion of the plan and performance in other areas.

But workers inservice workshops were upset because their performance was hard to judgeaccording to output criteria, and they were usually just given a grade2 rating.

So a grade l shop, grade l group, grade l individual couldget 30¥ in a month.A grade 3 sshop, grade 3 group, grade 3 individualcould get as little as 5-l0￥.1Also, some groups and shops did not get anybonuses for very poor performance or large accidents which caused produc-tion to stop.Also, individuals within groups were assessed to get nobonuses.The proportion was lower the better your group was assessed.

Workers felt this wasS an unfair system, because in many ways it wasarbitrary. It was difficult to assess points for a lot of things, andalso the performance of a shop as a whole is difficult to compare--theyproduce different things， somee don't turn out products at all but repair

Also, it depends onthings and produce electricity and other services.how high your quota is set.Workers argued within the groupovera.ssess-ments and groups as a whole were upset with the fairness andcomparability

Workers were upset largely because the diff-of the quotas set for them.erence between the best and the worst were so high, so they were tenseabout asking for leave, causing accidents.

During the cultural revolution, a number of workers. rose up and opposedand criticized thiss system, so they abolished it.They called it 'materialincentives'.  So they started to give supplementary wages, where they took10% of the average wage in the plant, 5.8¥, and distributed it to all the

People received this regardless of their performance--thisemployees.made workers very lazy.

This madethingsdifficult for theworkerswithlower wages, because they didn't have a chance to increase their. incomewith large bonuses.

The people who already had a high basic wage wereliving comfortably.

After Lin Biao died, about one year or so, they had a bonus system.This began around 1974 or so.:But this was a different system thanbefore the cultural revolution.They had simple discussions in each groupevery month.This was called 'labor competition prize' (laodong jingsaijiang).They assessed workers' performance in a general way, then separatedworkers into three grades.

Onlythose. with serious problems were refuseda prize--those with absences over five days, for example.The amounts ofmoney involved were small.Grade 1 was 3¥, grade 2 2¥, and grade 3 1.5¥.The total amount depended on the amount in the plants welfare expenditurefund. This was not much use.The amounts were so small, but it was the

-3-first sprout of the later reappearance of bonuses.

After this, the bonus system gradually enlarged and developed untilit became just the same as before, nine grades in all,but they didn'thave some of the individual bonuses anymore after l978, which was the datewhen it was finally restored completely.

When they restored the bonussystem fully. there was a complex system with regard to the supplementarywages.Those who had started work before l967 got supplementary wagesof 5.8¥, equal to 10% of the average plant wage in 1967.All workers,technical cadres and staff, and all leading cadres below grade l7 got thesameamount.Then there were those who were apprentices or practicingtechnicians (jianxi) in l967.They were given only one half ofa supplement--2.9¥. Then al1 those vwhoentered after l967 got no wagesupplement at all.The people who got wage supplements have kept themright up to the present.The amounts have not changed, despite changes inthe average wage in the plant.

During 1978,sshortly after the complete restoration of the former bonussystem,they tried to abolish the supplementary wage.This made the oldworkers very unhappy.

They didn't raise too many opinions about this, buttheir work activism and efficiency went dowm so strikingly that theyrestored the supplementary wagessin1 Canton once again after only 3 months.These old workers were the backbone of production, were often the groupleaders, and they1 couldn't afford havingthem be unhappy.These 5.8ysupplements were an important portion of the wage they hadI come to expect.This effect on work efficiency did not start just when the supplements werecancelled, but began even earlier, when they started preparatory propagandaabout abolishing them and the workers figured out what was coming. Onereason·old workers were unhappy with this policy was that this would givethem the same wage as some younger workers of the same grade who were notbackbone elements.

They have decided finally to use another method to phase out the oldsupplementary wages.When a worker is given a wage raise in a readjustment,he will be given an increase in wages up to that grade level, and then cancelthe supplement.This often would amount them to a raise of only l-2￥.But this is unlikely to work out either, because the workers feel that thisis such a small raise and they have no idea when their next chance for araise will be--there are still no fixed rules for that in China, it stilldepends completely on central policy.  sSo it is difficult for these workersto give up the rights they already have.It is like asking them to wastea wage raise.These supplementary wages were almost the same as being agrade higher anyway.

The new bonus systemn they have had since l978 is basically similar to the

They divide shops, groups, and individualsone before the cultural revolution.into three grades, based on output, quality, attendance, etc.They havequotas for aanumberofdifferentthings.But the differences in income forthe grades6 are smaller than before.This is a big problem, and for thatreason the money is not enough to stimulate enthusiasm to the extent thatitdidbeforetheculturalrevolution.lNow the highest bonus possible is9¥ per month， the lowest about 3¥.The most common grade for individualsis grade 2.

There are also year end awards for advanced workers, only a handful in

They got lo+¥ at the end of theeyearforayear-endbonuseach plant.(nianzhong jiang).

There have also recently been added a series of 'indivi-dual item bonuses' (danxiang jiang) in each shop based on the conditions

There is a general limit on the amount of money involved,of production.and the shop uses retention of portions of profits, decreases inIcosts，etc.to distribute itself as it sees fit.These are usually bonuses gauged by

-4-per-unit overfulfillment of production targets.These bonuses cannotbe too great.Any extra money from overfulfilling the quotas over theamount they are limited to will be given to the factory.

So the differencein income still is not very great.

Generally, the difference in amountof money between the grades of bonuses is not really sufficient to spurworkers as before the cultural revolution.

Now when they assess for bonuses thereeare still arguments just asbefore.

But generallythegroupleader'sopinioncountsforalotwhen

This means that there is a lot of ass-pattingthey have these assessments.(pai mapi)of the leader and some people ingratiate themselves with theleaders in order to get bonuses(kao paimapi).

Generally, if you areassessed well by the leader you will.do good.

If a leaderc has a bad

Things are in some ways run by the conceptimpression of you it is hard."will of the leader"(zhangguan yizhi).:If the leader says that Zhang isgrade l, then you can't say no, he's really grade 2.These people arethe politically reliable ones, with good class background (chushen),who are political activists and ass-patters.

They have their

Group leaders are assessed thesame as everyone else.owm attendance records， production output, quality， etc.So they arenot always assessed at grade l.Now they assess people after work, butsince differences in awards are not that great, they don't want towaste much time on the meetings.

So often they use an implicit rotationsystem--the method is a ssecret to the above leadership0 levels.But thishelps keepdiscussions short and arguments to a minimum.

Leading cadres as well as staff in departments and shops get bonuseswhich are the same as the rest of the workers.The leading cadres parti-cipateinsmallgroup appraisal meetings with the office staff.Theawards depend on the shop or department performance.But leaders getno more money than others in the staff.Plant directors, party secretaries,and other leadingcadres at that leveldonot get any bonuses at all.This includes directors, vice-directors, secretaries,vice-secretaries.

Abolishing bonuses during the cultural revolution increased incomeinequality.

Why does he say this?Because when workers got bonuses itincreased their income relative to the higher paid.But when they lostbonuses their income went down, and their livelihood was more directlyaffected than those people whoaalready had much higher incomes.New Workers

(7/12/80, 3 hrs.)

The factory was on the outskirts of the city, in the suburbs.Newworkers did not come directly from the countryside, and could not sincethe 1950s.There were several. sources for new workers.1) demobilizedsoldiers.This was one way to get a factory job if you were in thecountryside.You joined the PLA first and then usuallywenttoafactory

They beganthereafter.This changed after the cultural revolution.

2) workers from nearby countysending soldiers back to their villages.

This happened when there was unemployment in the towm, and a labortowns.shortage in their city plant. 3) the'social youth'. Before: the culturalrevolution, but not afterwards, these people would stay at home and studyorregisterr with the labor bureau and await a job assignment.Thesewerethe 20% who didn't pass the test for lower middle school, and the 40% whodidn't pass the test for entering upper middle school.4) studentsassigned jobs after graduation from schools at various levels.5)

childrenof retiring workers.:If after retirement you can have a child of age to

This is called the retirement nametake your place you can arrange this.

This can be arranged also if you are sick andquota (tuixiu dingming e).

-5-have to retire early. 6) 'going through the back door'. This is usingpower and influence to get a factory job for your children.TThis is onlypossible for cadres, and is rather rare.

The plant enlarged quickly during the period he was there, and mostof the new workers came from the lower and upper middle school graduatesin Canton City.

Since l977they didn't sendthem down to the countrysidefirst.The city Labor Bureau arranged this.

The graduates withoutworknowgooto street collectives.Types of Permanent Workers

Those from technical middle school or above become technicians orskilled workers. ·After one year's practicum (jianxi), the middle leveltechnical graduates are assessed to see whether they should be skilledworkers or technicians.The skilled workers can also be upper or lowermiddle school graduates who go through three year apprenticeship periods.They had many types of skilled workers--electricians, fitters (this requiredbeing good with tools, being able to read diagrams), drill press operators,casting workers, turners (chegong), steel milloperators.

All thesedifferent kinds of machinistsrplus various other kinds of constructionworkers, painters, carpenters, gauge repairman, and many others. 1About70% of the workers in their factory were skilled workers, about 30%were ordinary workers(putong gongren).

The wages6 for all skilled workers are the same.:Itdoesnotvary

The wages of skilled workers are higher than that of theby specialty.ordinary workers at each grade, and the difference at each grade getsbigger as the grade gets higher. For example, a grade l worker gets35, while a skilled worker at·the same grade gets 39￥.Also thepromotion possibilities for skilled and unskilled workers are not thesame.If you go through the apprenticeship period you will be grade lafter three years, grade 2 at the end of the 4th year. So the fifthyear, by regulation, you are grade 2.If you start as an ordinary worker,you are grade l, but you have to wait until the next readjustment to beconsidered for a raise, and even then it is not certain.This, undernormal conditions, might take many years.1During the cultural revolutionand after it took even longer.

They also continued to give young workers study classes before thecultural revolution, twicee a week, toraise their cultural,mathlevel.But after the CR this stopped. In l977 they started again, because thekids coming out of the schools were at a very low level, they couldn'tunderstand an awful lot of things, not even the simplest math, and couldn'teven read that well.Temporaryand Contract Labor

They had contract workers before the cultural revolution but not after.They stopped hiring new ones to come after then, and after the CR changedthem all to permanent workers, and they became part of the unit permanently.Most of them signed contracts, but many had worked much longer.Theyraised the demand to be changed to permanent status. Very few in the

They came mostly from among the 'socialplant were contract workers.youth' in Canton.

Temporary workers were in use both before the cultural revolution and

Before the CR they came both from the city and countryside.Afterafter.the CR they came onlyfrom the countryside.Temporary workers did ordinary

Contract workers did somelabor, cleaned up, dug ditches, moved goods.kinds of technically skilled work.Contract workers got wages the sameas permanent workers. But the temporary workers were given piece rates, or

-6-they were paid by the job, and could leave if they finished early.Thiswas called the 'contract system' (baogong zhi).AAlso, they paid wages totheir commune, not to the individual worker. Temporary workers did notget any kinds of fringe benefits from the factory at all.They havethese temporary workers right up to the present, they come from1thecountryside.They do not come from the city.They do not have contractworkers today.Punishments, Discipline

For breaking plant regulations, the first step is criticism in smallgroup meetings(piping).The second step is an official warning (jinggao).Then there are two different kinds of 'recordings' (jiguo).Major (da)and minor (xiao). This represents a 'minor reprimand' or a 'majorreprimand'.They are offically recorded in the file.This is fairlyserious for your future. If you still don't improve, they will keep youunder supervision (liuchang chakan). If you still don't improve, theycan expel you.

Some problems are more serious than others, so you can start at diff-erent steps in the punishment process. For illicit sexual relations,you will at least start with a reprimand (jiguo). The same is thecase for stealing.The most common punishments are criticism andwarnings.

They did have some workers who were fired.They were continuallygetting into arguments, fights, stealing things.  These were young hooligans.These people had gone through the entire process of criticism, warnings;etc.They were repeated offenders.No others were ever expelled.1Youcan be expelled for prolonged absence without leave--20 days out of themonth.But for bad work, coming late, causing accidents due to carelessness,the worst you can get is a criticism or warning.Worker Education

There were a number of educationalopportunities for workersbefore theCR.  In their factory they had several classes. Some for cultural (readingand writing) education, and some for technical education.Some were runby the education committee of the union.Some were run by the educationalgroup of the safety department.Therewerealsoworkertechnicaleducationschools run by the plant.The young workers were mobilized to attend,but all workers could attend on a voluntary basis.These were usuallyabout two evenings a week. Technicians were the teachers.They alsohad study classes arranged in shops where experienced workers would teachyounger workers technical skills.

The factory's !school' gave regular middle school level reading andwriting classes to workers who had not yet graduated from middle school.Also they had technical school level technical courses.  There were alsoopportunities to go to other schools, but not normally to universities.You could not audit at a university.

From 1967 to 1977 there was basica1ly no program for worker educationin their plant.  Technical education was considered the 'white and expert'road. Not until l978 did they start to run these classes again.NOWbonuses are related to your willingness to study, and also the higheryour technical level, the better the chance for your bonus and raise.Sopeople are more willing to study than before. Generallyspeaking， workerswill study harder if you link promotion a raises to their study activities.

July 2l Workers' Colleges:  They had one in their factory during theGang of Four period.They said these were university level classes, but

-7-they were more like middle school level.The level was quite low.Alsothe people who participated in these no longer had to work.(Onepersoncould go from each shop each year.

But these'universities' were a sham(pianren de).

They weren't really university level courses.They spenta lot of time running movements and doing political study--too much.TTheeducation in these universities was really 1laughable.

You had to have five years of work experience to get in, then l.5 yearsof full time study，tthen you returned to your shop as a technician.Butthey didn't really need more technicians in every shop, so sometimes thiswasawaste.Also, to take his shop as an example, why would an electricianwith five years of experience need to take more technical courses?

The teachers in these workers universities were technicians.Theystarted them upin the mid-1970s,aand they were rather late in establishingthem--he thinks it was around l976 or so.These people had to have fiveyears of work experience ， be 25 years of age or under, and had tohave graduated from upper middle school.1People would apply, and the shopdirector would select the person and permit them to go.These schoolswere disbanded at the end of 1978, not long after the first group hadgraduated.Chemical Fertilizer Factory(7/19/80, 3 hrs.)

Leading group:Before the cultural revolution,they had 'one-manmanagement'(yizhang zhi) which they borrowed from the USSR. But the powersof the plant director were not as great as in the USSR.(China had plantdirectors 'under the leadership of the party committee'.This meant thatthe director and party secretary were not parallel as in the UssR--the

The directordirector was under the leadership of the party secretary.was in charge of production and business, and the party secretary wasresponsible for politics.(Of course the plant director was a partymemberand a party committee member also.

The director was in charge of all operations.But under him were vice-directors.

They specializein different responsibilities.(One wasincharge of production planning and coordinationn(diaodu)， one was in chargeof machinery and equipment maintenance, repairs and renovations.Anotherwas responsible for logistics, or the livelihood and welfare administrationof the plant--housing, canteen,1medicine.There wasanother responsiblefor sales and supply.

Before the cultural revolution, this plant director and the vice-directorswere mostly revolutionary cadres from the PLA, and had received training inmanagement in the years since then, and had many years of experience as thetop cadres in plants.He refers to these people as 'old cadres'.During the1960s some engineers from universities began to be promoted to leading

Also there were some leaders who had been old workers, alwaysgroups.backbone elements, activists, model workers, who had been promoted overthe years to be shop director, plant director.

In their plant, they had one university trained engineer who was called'chieff engineer' (zong gongchengshi), and who was vice-director in charge of

This chief engineer had been an engineer before liberation andproduction.had received college training in the US.Those turned out of Chineseuniversities since liberation were still rare, and still had not gottenenough experience in management tobe promoteda to top positions.

Whentherewasaa big question1 to be decided, the party committee first discusses

The director is usually a vice-party secretary andit in their meeting.also a member of the party committee.A couple of the vice-directors were

They also had some basic-level leading cadresalso party committee members.

-8-like shop directors and some outstanding workers on the party committee.rheyalso might call an 'enlarged party ccommittee meeting', which willalso include some non-party people.

They do this when they need theparticipation of the non-party people involved.

During the period of the cultural revolution, and afterwards, theyhad a revolutionary committee.They decided to simplify administration,and reduced the administration to three groups:

production, politicalwork, and administration.The top posts onthe revolutionary committee wasfilled first by a PLA representative, and after he left by a party secre-tary.They were in effect plant directors also.

They had no experiencein production, and things were throw into disorder.

Therewasalotofreduplication and inefficiency in the administrative groups, and thethreegroups got larger and larger because they couldn't handle the workassigned to them.The party committee led everything.

This was called'unified leadership' (yiyuan hua lingdao).

After the Gang of Four fell， they returned to the pre-CR system andabolished the revolutionary committees. At the same time they sent a numberof old party cadres to cadree schools to learn business skills.  A lot ofcadres fear these new policies because before they only knew propagandaand political work, and had been criticizing the 'theory of the primacyof production' for such a long time.Those that are able to handle produc-tionareafraidtodosobecausetheyffear that later on another campaignwill come and they will be attacked again for the same kinds of things.

When they abolished the revolutionary committee, everyone went backto their old jobs--workers became workers once again, soldiers wentback to the army.These people had no knowledge of production.An oldcadre was installed as plant director, who had been sent down during theCR.Therewasalot of this6 sort of ideological problem among people duringthis time.They remembered the CR era and were timid, were afraid topursue production and material incentives.

They had one shop director and two vice-directors,

ShopStructure:one branch partyI secretary and one union head.Then there were severaloffice workers.(One handled laborand wages, one handled costs calculation,and there was one safety inspector.

They also had a few shop technicians,but they were assigned to the sections and not the shops.

They had two sections, the repair section and the electrical powersection.Most shop directors are partyY members and members of the partybranch committee.The division of labor and meetings at the plant levelare much like those in the shops. 1Not allassistantshopdirectorsare

Most shop directors were experienced workers with highpartymembers.technical skill and knowledge of work operations.Some were universitytrained technicians who had worked at the basic level for years and hadsince entered the party.

Then they could be promoted to shop director.But this was somewhat less common.

They had several work groups in his section, there being three shifts

But they had four groups6(ban) within each productionto each group.group, and the four groups(ban could also be translated as 'shift') useda rotation system where there would be one group on rest each day.1Eachshifthada 'shift supervisor'((zhiban zhang) which did on-the-floorleadership work, production coordination.There was also a repair groupwhich worked on 3 shifts.

As a technician in thee section, the informant did repairs that popped up,and also drew up renovation and repair plans which had to be approved bythe departments after all-plant meetings.

The shop directors and section heads are not assessed for bonuses along

They are assessed at leadership meetings for bonuses whichwiththeworkers.

-9-are related toshop performance but differences in the amount of moneygiven them is not that great whether or not they finish the targets.Theyare just divided into three grades like everyone else.

As a technician, the informant's job was to make sure the entiregeneration system was running well, that there were no electrical shorts1etc.He inspected the generators for oiling, maintenance. On the basisof these daily inspections, he would base his plans for renovation and repairsof a non-urgent nature.Repairs are divided into three levels ofseriousness.Large, medium, and small. scale repairs.There were regulations and formsfor each of these.He had to get permission from thee production controlofficee(diaodu shi） of the production department in order to stop machinesto repair them.1After they are repaired by the repair group under hisdirection, he directs the testing and has to certify that the machine nowmeets the required specifications, and he has to sign his name.Section Meetings

They normally did not have many meetings in the section.The mostcommon reason for a section meeting was an accident where someone wasinjured.  TThen they would have a meeting to discuss and analyze it.Anotherreasonwasto0 criticize people who sleep on the job, do a poorjob, have iliicit sex and get caught, engage in arguments and fights.They also had section meetings at the beginning of campaigns to heardocuments read. These were mobilization meetings.

The work groups6 had their own meeting system for political study andproduction, and assessing for bonuses.They had five after-shift meetingsper week for one purpose or another.The content was set by the shopleadership who specified the number of meetings to be spent on politics,andthenumberonproductionmatters.Technical Reform Small Groups

They had these kinds of '3-in-l' groups after the cultural revolution,but not before.!They combined workers, leading cadres, and technicians.They were not very effective or useful.

They accomplished little.Theydid not meet often, didn't study much.Workers mostly stayed in the shops,and leading cadres in the offices.They had this kind of group, but reallyit was usually only one meeting or so where they got the necessary parti-cipants together and made a decision, and then went ahead and did it.Thegroup did not meet thereafter.Everyone all had their work to do. Hefeels that the leading cadres called these meetings when they wanted tomake a decision because they wanted to be able to make a report to theirsuperiors that they had done this.jIt was 'in name but no content' (you mingwi shi). They still have this form today.The people are not taken awayfrom their production tasks for this.Four cleans Movement

They had this movement in l964. A work team came to the plant toinvestigate the leading cadres at the shop director level and above.Thework team was assigned by the provincial leadership, and included cadresandworkerspulledoutofotherfactories.These were people who earlierwere activists with good political showing.sSome were party members, somewere not.They were after the people in power.

When they arrived, all the leading cadres stood aside temporarily whilethe investigations and criticism meetings went on.They solicited criticismon leaders' work styles at meetings.Of course, there were some workers whoused this situation to complain "he took away my bonus!He's suppressing the

-10-

So a lot of the criticism was too severe and there wasworking class!"no reason to it.

Production dropped because the work team did not know how to run produc-tion.They threw the entire administrative structure into disorder, andused work time to handle the meetings, hold criticisms, put up wallposters.Even though they had criticisms, these were not struggle sessions likeduring the cultural revolution.

There was a vice shop director who was a grade l technical cadre (thismust mean grade l0 on the technicians scale), a college graduate from theearly l950s, and who had entered the party.

They criticized him for havingparticipated in a KMT youth league organization during middle school.

They did not let you answer back or protest, they just accused you ofbeing dishonest.This man had been a member of the KMT youth for lessthana year, and it was in his file and he had already admitted this to theParty long ago.

But nowthe work team was accusinghim of havingbeenaleader and backboneelement of theorganization.

They also went afterother leaders for having 'proud and haughty' airs, for punishing workers

This was called suppressing the workers.or criticizing them.

Hewassentdown to be a worker, and taken away from leading work.

There was a section head who was given the same punishment, he wasalso accused of looking down on workers, of having relations with the KMT.They also caught some people in corruption.

They had stolen some materials,or had juggled sales transactions and kept the money for themselves.

Thesewere people in the sales and supply office..At that time fertilizer wasdear and these people could demand extra cash and favors for a sale.Ifthe corruption was over lo,ooo¥, they kicked you out of the party and theunit and sent you to labor reform.There were other less severe forms ofpunishment given out for lesser corruption.

The campaign continued for about one year until l965.The generalresult was that they had gotten rid of some party cadres, but often thethings they were accused of were phoney or the seriousness was greatlyexaggerated.Cultural Revolution

(7/26/80, 3 hrs.)

There were two factions.(One faction was the 'dragons beget dragons;tigers beget tigers, Laozi's son will become a great man' people.Thesewere the people whose parentage was in the '5 red categories'. ?These werepeople with good class backgrounds, fathers who were revolutionary soldiers,workers, cadres, etc.They formed fightingteamss to attack the leader-ship but did not allow those with bad class backgrounds to participate.Later, those whose class backgrounds were not as good also formed theirowm fighting groups.Theywantedtoparticipateeinthemovementtoo.

As the movement went on, the various fighting teams gradually formedinto two major organizations as the small fighting groupssformed alliances.

They bothThey did not recognize the "conservative/rebel" distinction.claimed to be the true revolutionary faction.There was no great differencein the viewpoints of the two factions.They both wanted todrag out leaders,get power, have the PLA support them, and then monopolize power in thefactory.

They were in competition.

They supported and opposed different cadres.They took a cadre to astrugglee session, and others would oppose this, than drag off another leader.When they 1met, they would fight, sometimes they were armed.

When thishappened,production dropped..

There was also a 'centrist' (zhongjian pai) faction, which didn'tsupport or oppose one faction or the other.FBut they were very small.Itwas difficult to be unaligned because the two factions were always trying

-11-to get people to support them and join up.It was hard to refuse.lAlSO,factional alignments city-wide were strange.  One faction within the plantwould join up with the Red Flag, whereas in another plant, a group withthe same viewpoint might be aligned with the East Wind.There was noreal relationship between one's beliefs and pledging loyalty to one oranother city-wide organization.  It was a very strange kind of factionalism.

At the beginning, there were a number of separate, small 'fightinggroups' criticizing different leaders for all kinds of different reasons.They gradually united into two major opposing factions which went afterdifferent leaders,-and tried to protect the leaders that the other factionwas trying to attack. Gradually literary struggle (wendou) turned intoarmed struggle (wudou).

Eventually. all the cadres from the shop leadership level and abovestoodaside.Some of them went totheshop floor todomanual laborwith the masses. SSome of them were accused of more serious crimes, somehistorical, and they were sent to study groups(xuexiban).

Thenon-partycadres were especially out of luck.These were called 'study groups' but

These were places where they were to be cross-examinednostudywenton.andmadee to confess their errors.Each faction had their own for differentcadres.It was not done in any systematic way.sSome cadres committedsuicide.Also, all the staff and especially technical cadres were sentdown for manual labor.

After the cadres stood aside, the two factions ran the factory. Ifone faction dominated in one shop, then their leader would run it.Ifanother faction dominated in another, then they would run it.TThey did notcooperate or listen to one another's orders.

WhenthePLAarrivedintheplant, they then ran it.

His factory'sSproduction was entirelydisrupted from about September1966 until the spring of the next year when the PLA arrived.FProductionbasically stopped.After that it was on and off for a while, still therewere problems for quite some time.Revolutionary Committee

Whenthe PLAcamethenewspaper saidtheyweresupposedto'support theleft'. But this was questionable.The PLA was different in every region,and had different orientations in different regions.Their job was tonegotiate a peace between factions, prevent armed struggle.When they firstcame they appointed a management committee (guanli weiyuan hui）and organizedstudy groups for the faction leaders to study the great alliance they weretoform.

This management committee was not the same as the later revolutionarycommittee.It was a temporary committee led by the PLA head and had membersof both factions in it.It was supposed to manage the factory.But graduallythe power of the PLA in it became greater, until the PLA was itself leadingthe factory.The PLA group was called "PLA support the left group" (jiefangjun zhizuo zu).

The PLA, after the establishment of a 'great alliance committee', helda series of 'fermentation meetings' where the masses expressed copinionsonwhich old cadres were revolutionary and should be 'liberated', and which oftheir faction leaders should be nominated. At that time the managementcommittee had changed into a 'great alliance committee' under the leadership

After these fermentation meetings were held, the upperof the PLA group.levels of leadership, meaning the PLA and the mass leaders, discussedwho should be on the revolutionary committee, which cadres should beliberated.They prepared to restore a management structure of some sort in

-12-the plant.After this, the "Military Control Committee" (junguan hui) decidedwhich people would be on the RC.The head of the RC was the head of themilitary control committee.There were six vice-heads. Threewereliberatedcadres--the former party secretary, vice secretary, and plant director.The other three were mass representatives, leaders of the factions whichwere appointed by the committee.  There were nine other members of thestandingcommittee.Thesewerethestandingmembers(changwei). Theywereethe vice-heads and heads of various administrative and technicalgroups which had been established to take the place of the previous depart-ments which had been abolished.  They were all full-time cadres who didnot participate in production.  sSome were former middle-level cadres,some previously were workers who now had become cadres.There additionallywere close to 6o regular members(weiyuan）.They still had regular produc-tion jobs, and were workers and staff members.

The entire body of the RC met once or twice a year.The members of theRC were just members in name,and they had no real leadership tasks.Administrative Changes

The previous departments were all abolished.They renamed the shops,departments, and groups according to military terminology.They organizednew groups to take the place of previous departments.The heads of theseadministrative groups were all standing members of the RC. There were 4groups in all--this was the same arrangement used in all administrativelevels from the province and city downward.There was a political workgroup, a production group, an 'affairs' (banshi） office，aand a securitygroup (bao wei zu).

The security group was in charge not only of the physical security ofthe plant and state property, but also of illegal behavior and crimes.They also handled people accused of political offenses, and investigated

There were about lo people.The political work grouptheir backgrounds.had about 30+, as did the production group.

As time went on, each enlargedto about loo people.At the end, these departments were even more enlargedthan the previous departments before the CR.The administrative group hadabout10.The political work group did the work of the former party committeeand political department.  when the party committee was re-established in1969, the political department became a department under it. The productiongroup did the work of the previous supply department , production department,production control office, and technology department.The administrativegroup did the work of the previous plant office and administrative depart-ment, and safety department.Cleaning of the Class Ranks

At the time they were beginning to establish a great alliance, theMilitary Control`Committee began to run this campaign.:It went onforover a year.After the structure was restored and the RC established,it reached its high tide for about 2 months. By that time, the newlyestablished political work and security groups were running the movement.The political group organized the meetings, did the investigations,and the security groupwouldtakethe peopleawayandthensendthemto the countryside.Several hundred workers were sent to the countryside,to their home villages, not to return until after l972, after the deathof Lin Biao.

Who was attacked? Mostly people who were dissatisfied with the presentsituation, who may have made a remark about the availability of commoditieswhich was subsequently reported, or who may have made a politically-colored

-13-joke or pun.Also people who didn't listen to the PLA or RC leadership.These may have been leaders of previous fighting groups. They were peoplewho had engaged in violent struggle, beaten leaders and other workers,who had raided offices and stolen documents and state secrets.Thesepeople were sent to public security bureaus and to labor reform, notback to their home villages.

At the same time, a large number of cadres like the informant--staffand technicians--were sent dowm to the shops to be workers.TThe informantworked in the shops for three years, and not until Lin Biao died did hereturn to office work.They sent a lot of people down to villages, and :attacked them during these campaigns, who in reality were good people whohad no real problems.The peasants didn't like having all these peoplebeing sent to their areas.

After all, a farm's a center of production,not a jail.Evolution of Administration, l972-76

In l972 or so they restored the departments, and began to call them

The groups had grown so large that they were unmanageable,ke once again.and they had to split them up again.

They also returned all of the formerdepartment personnel to the offices, and returned some of the workers inthe offices back to the shops. There were also a couple of vice-directorswho had been 'left hanging' for several years whoreturnedtothestandingcommittee to take up duties: again.

The PLA also left in l972, and the party secretary became the head ofthe RC.The PLA left gradually. At first, all the heads of the adminis-trative groups had been members of the military control committee, andthey gradually left one by one, and finally the head of the committeehimself left, leaving the plant with no military officers.

There was still some factionalism among the leadership during thistime.The old cadres were resentful of those who had attacked themearlier.Then there were a lot of new cadres who earlier had been workers.They had moved up very fast, like airplanes, and they were afraid of neither

But they didn't know much about leading production.heaven nor earth.These were not factions, but just two groups of people who didn't get alongwell with one another.Changes aftertheGangofFour

Other than the changes in wages. the first and most striking change wasthat they began to organized and mobilize workers to study technical skills.They began to restore rules and regulations of the old days.The amountof political study1 decreased, and an increase in safety meetings, technical

A group of cadres whose cases had never been cleared up,study meetings.and some of the people sent to the countryside during the cleaning of theclass ranks who had never been cleared, returned from the shops and thecountryside.

Almost all of the standingcommittee members on the RC who had becomecadres during :the cultural revolution and who formerly had been workers,were sent back to their previous work.But among them those who had gotteninto departments or were shop-level leaders, very few were sent back totheir previous posts.Only those among them who had committed serious errors

This iss why they say, "cadres can move up, but not down" (ganbu nengwere.shang, bu neng xia).

In l978 they abolished the RC and restored the plant director system.The party secretary who was leading the RC became the Party secretary:and one vice head of the RC who had been vice plant director before the

-14-CR became the plant director. They established an office of the ChiefEngineer, and put an old vice-director from before the CR in charge.They promoted five old technicians to be engineers.  Two went to workin the office of the Chief Engineer. The others became the heads of3 departments.  The old plant director from before the CR had beenpromoted to a job in the bureau earlier, in l973.

About a year before the Gang of Four fell, they abolished the politicaldepartment (zhengzhi bu)， because it reduplicated the efforts of thepropaganda department and organization department which were also undertheparty.Thestructurewastooenlargedandtherewastoomuchduplication,so they abolished it.  They still have the security department.  You can'tabolish that. Its powers are still the same as before.

They had no elections of any officials after the fall of the gang offour. They did have a workers' congress every year, but this was nothingspecial.TThey had been having them since the end of the CR.

一15一

描述：

