id: 12ad792981
标题：Hong Kong Interviews: Informant No. 58
日期：1980-6-19,1980-6-21
是否是时间段：false
作者：Andrew G. Walder
来源：
标签：文章
书籍：Hong Kong Interviews: Informant No. 58
书籍作者：Andrew G. Walder

正文：
INFORMANT NO. 58

PERSONALDATAAge:36

Sex:Male

Technical school graduateEducation:Total Years Relevant Experience:

8Last Year of Relevant Experience: l972

Year Left China:  1972Initial Immigration Status:LegalNative Place/overseas Connections:

Indonesia 0S, returned 1950sClass Background/Political Designation:

OS

OCCUPATIONALHISTORYSUMMARY

Oil Refinery, Maoming, Guangdong, 1965-72Positions Held:1)

a) Electrician, 1965-70

b) Staff member, Purchasing Dept., 1970-72Administrative Level of Work Unit/(No. of employees):

1)

probably Province/(3000)

TOTAL HOURS:3

PAGES TEXT:APPOINTMENTS:2

4No. 58Occupational History (6/l9/80, 1.5 hrs.)

The informant was born in Fujian, moved to Indonesia early in hischildhood and came back to China in his early teens.Because his fatherwas a classmate of Liao Chengzhi, he was able to get into the specialPeking #27 Middle School. After graduation from lower middle schoolin l962, at age 18, he.was assigned to a technical middle school atMaoming, Guangdong province. He graduated in l965, after three'years

In l965 he was assigned to work at a large integrated Coalof study.Mining Complex of l2,0oo employees, the main industry of Maoming.

Thecomplex included coal mines, coal processing and transport plants,electrical generation plants, and machine building plants.He workedin an oil refinery which made oil from coal, and which employed 3,000people.He was an electrical worker for 5 years, then from l970-72he worked in the purchasing department (caigou ke). He came outlegally in l972, again through personal connections that his father hadwith top leaders in Peking.His application for an exit visa wasprocessed in only 5 days.Wages

He attended technical middle school, so after he graduated he wasa technical worker, grade 3. He went through a trial period (jianxi)for one year at 42¥, and one year later, he was made regular (zhuanzheng)and got 56¥.TThere were no wage readjustments while he was at theplant. He did not have to go through an apprenticeship period, whichwas one year, because he went to technical school.

Before the cultural revolution they had a yearly testing system forraises which was set by the Petroleum Ministry and which was independentof the national wage readjustments.  If you tested well, you had a goodwork and political showing, then you would be raised 5. They justincreased the wages, did not change the wage grade.

This practice wasabolished in 1966.

They had bonuses until March 1966.He was an electrician, so in hisgroup the bonuses worked like this: If he was repairing motors that daythey would give him a quota of lo to repair.1If he fixed more, he wouldget 2or per motor over the quota.

This was a sort of piece wage (jijian

They were givengongzi).

They also had a contract (baogong) system.X number of days to install a piece of electrical equipment.If they finishedearly, they would work on other things and thus get more money. He couldincrease his monthly wages by about l4¥ per month this way, and got about70￥.: New workers were eligible for bonuses6 during their trial periods.

There were no supplementary wages after they abolished the bonuses.If they were in need of money. they had to ask their group leader fora supplement.  TThey also had moral incentives before the CR, they selectedadvanced workers and gave them towels, thermos bottles, and publicizedtheir names.1After 1966 they discontinued this.DisciplineeandAttendance

Before l966, they would deduct wages if you were at work less than 25

They would deduct according to l/27 of your' salary, or indays a month.other words, a day's wage.  If you ask for sick leave or personal leave,you were not docked wages, but for personal leave you were limited tol day per month.

If you worked poorly or engaged in bad behavior, first they talked to

-1-and educated you.After that, they gave you warnings.After the thirdwarning, if you have not made a self-criticism and improved, they wouldsuspend you for three months, after which they would return you to work.This was suspension without pay.This was not rare.They did this forthose who were absent without leave, gambling, fighting and arguingwithother workers.After one month they gave you a chance to come back anddo a self-criticism in front of a mass meeting.

If after you come backyou do the same thing all over again, they can suspend you for another3 months without warning.

After the fifth suspension, the plant canget permission from the Municipal Labor Department (Chu) to expel theworker.

In all his time there, only1 3 workers were expelled.

Onefor gangfighting, another for gambling. and another for illicit sexual relations.These were all repeated offenders.This was just in his shop.IHedoesnot know about other shops.

After l966 all of these regulations fell into disuse.There were nopenaltiess for poor attendance, no firings， warnings, or suspensions.It waslike this right up0to1972whenheleft.

Thisalsohada badeffecton attendance and work activism, because there were no punishments orchanges in wages regardless of your behavior.There was another aspect tothe problem.

Before the cultural revolution workers could raise theirlivelihood problems--housing, food, pay--with their union representativesin the shop, of which there were many. or with the branchn party secretarywhen he came down twice a week for chats with workers to find out aboutlivelihood problems.

But after this time there was no union, and thebranch secretary was in trouble.Workerscouldnotraisetheselivelihoodissues then.It was said to reflect capitalist thought.Contract Workers

(6/21/80, 1.5 hrs.)

All the contract workers came from the villages.TThereweretwotypes.First, workers aged l5-l8 signed 3-year contracts, and got l.5¥ for eachday they showed up, or about 30+ ¥ a month.

They were called 'young workers'(qing gong), and they came from families in villages that were in economicdifficulty.

If their performance was good, they could be made into per-manent workers, starting out as apprentices.About 30% of the staff inthe enterprise were these kinds of workers.

They did moving work, pulledcoal carts, etc.

Then there were the 'contract workers' (hetong gong).Theircontractsare signed for 5 year periods.They have a letter of introduction from theircommunes, undergo a physical exam.They do heavy manual labor in factoriesand mines, things that younger workers can't do.Their wages were about60¥ a month, but 2o¥ of that went to their brigade in order to buy grain.Only about 5% of these workers are ever turned into permanent workers.

Theyget no fringe benefits, these are the responsibility of their brigades.

These workers can be fired for violating rules and regulations of theenterprise, but few were because they had few opportunites in their homevillages, so they normally worked much harder than the permanent workers.They had a lot of contract workers when he got there in 1965, but they

Then the ones they still hadstopped hiring new oness after the CR began.were all left over from before.:Some used guanxii to get changed to permanentworkers.There were still a lot left in l972 , when he left, but this waslargely because the leadership was paralyzed by the cultural revolutionand theycouldn't really cut away excess workers.

-2-Work Experience, 1965-70

He worked in the oil refinery as an electrician in the generator plant,and he traveled around to different units where repairs and installations

He worked in the electrical team, about l5 workers,needed to be done.and sometimes they had to work up to l8 hours a day on repairs and install-ation， and worked up to 30 days a week.There was no overtime pay.

Butthere was a lot ofrest time duringthe daywhen there wasnothingelseto do.

There were no fixed quotas.Workers were judged based on how muchwork they completed, how well they finished the job.

They had an engineeringdepartment which had universitytrained technicians who inspected theirwork.They also had apprentices (tudi) who were there to help them out.

They had a group0leader who did regular work assignments, filled outreports, and communicated with the above leadership.

There was no vicegroup leader.No workers were appointed to help group leaders.Therewas a person abovethe group level， at the zhong dui:level, who appraisedworkers for prizesaand advanced worker awards.The grcup leaders wereat least communistt youth league members if not party members.Theiroverall workshop,called an 'attack group' (tuji dui), was split into 18groups in all.They were 'shock troops'specialized in different kindsof repair and installing work.CulturalRevolution

The cultural revolution did have a big impact on their enterprise,despiteitsremotelocation.They had two factions, and a number of topleaders were knocked down.He was not at his plant from January l967until l970, so he is not too clear on the sequence of events withintheenterprise.He went on an 'exchange of experience' all over Chinaon the trains, for free.1He went to Xinjiang, Inner Mongolia, Shanghai,Peking, Guangxi, Wuhan and other points.FHe was in Wuhan for a couple ofdaysin11the Summer of 1967 during the uprising there, but got outquickly.

They were shooting at one another and once a bullet whistled

After that he decided to leave immediately.past his head.

Later, ona boat from Wuzhou in Guangxi down the Pearl River towards Canton,he sawsome rebels shoot down and sink a large passenger ferry with anti-tankrockets stolen from a train on its way to Vietnam.

Theeferrysankimmediatelyand 1000 people were killed.The river flowed red with blood and therewere bodies everywhere.There was no special reason for these young rebelsto do this.They just wanted to try out these modern weapons.

About 80% of the workers in his enterprise left like this.That is

Whenwhyit took them until l97l to establish a revolutionary committee.he came back in l97o there was a Military Control Committee (junshi guanzhiweiyuanhui) in power in the plant.There were a lot of soldiers in thecity then to protect the oil and ccal production.

TheheadoftheeventualI revolutionary committee was a PLA officer.

a) the original party secretary, b) one leaderThe vice-heads were:from each faction， c） two surviving old cadres.They still had a partycommittee and power was held by the party secretary, but practically all

This was for the coal oil refinerythe party's activities had stopped.plant.The members of the RC were ordinary workers, cadres, and workersfrom eachof the factions.There were over 2o0 members of heeRCforthe whole refinery,'which had 2500 employees.?The leadership as a proportionof employees increased greatly during this6 period, because everyone waspullingg their own people up into the leadership.

They selected the members,

The PLA was in charge of establishing the RC.and each faction chose their own delegates in a haphazard way. The called

-3-the PLA cadres 'san dian hong' (three points of red), meaning thatthey had 3 stars on their uniforms, one on the cap and one on each pointof their collar.They did what the PLA people said, even though they didn'treally understand production.They were a pretty uncultured bunch, notvery bright, mostly from the countryside.

The plant was running at about30-40% of capacity during this time.Purchasing Work, 1970-72

When he first returned to the plant he was sent to the purchasingdepartment (caigou bu).They got all kinds ofequipment and materialby trading with other units.The material they used was gasoline,coal oil, chemicals for making chemical fibres (which they traded withunits in Shanghai), and small gauges.They were interested mostly intrading for motors and machinery.

This was entirely outside of theplant, and was ll by barter.

The leaders of the purchasing department were new cadres, young, fromthe leadership of the rebel faction.Theywererunninga kickbackschemein the process of making trades.Since gasoline was in short supply;they could do well in bartering it away.

Then they had a way of gettingahold of cash after raising the price of the goods.If a machine wasworth 8,000¥， they would call it 10,000¥ and keep the extra 2,000¥. Theleading cadres were running this operation, and all the personnel in theoffice were getting paid largely in order to keep them quiet.They knewhow to manipulate numbers and get cash1 from the finance department.Theinformant's wages were normally 56￥, and he got an extra 7o¥ per monththis way.There was also a lot of 'gifts' being given to the cadres tocement deals, things ]like cigarettes that made one's life easier.

He went out twice on buying trips, both times to 6hanghai for machines.When he got there he would call up the sales office of an enterprise onthe phone, talk to people to see if they needed what he had and if theycan get him what he needs.If possible he goes there bearing gifts likecigarettes, chats with the person, tries to establish a good personalrelationship. He will keep these contacts and they come in handly later.Then when he concludes a trade both sides will jack up the value by a certainamount，sign and chop each other's bill of sale, and use the "you buy mineand I buy yours"' method.  No contracts are signed.They take the bill ofsale back to the finance department of the enterprise, and get the cash,

Then the materials are packed away on a freightpocketingtheextra.train for the destination.They built up links (guagou) with certain heavymachinery plants in Shenyang, Shanghai, Wuhan, and Guangzhou, and went backrepeatedly to the same plants.

When they went on these trips the purchasing agents went in pairs and

They rotated people on thesewere paid 15¥ apiece per day for expenses.trips, never sent the same person all the time, because this would makethe detection of corruption more difficult than if a few people were regularlyinvolved.  So they kept changing the facess to avoid suspicion.

He thinks that the plant leadership knew about this corruption butthattheywereallsupporting one another among the leadership.1Leaders

Only if a problem was very big would it become knownwere all the same.and reported.  When this happened, it affected all the other plants withwhom they dealt.1People got in trouble throughout the network of links.

4-

描述：

