id: 08c94118bc
标题：Hong Kong Interviews: Informant No. 78
日期：1984-6-28
是否是时间段：false
作者：Andrew G. Walder
来源：
标签：文章
书籍：Hong Kong Interviews: Informant No. 78
书籍作者：Andrew G. Walder

正文：
No。 78Background:(6/28/84, 2。5 hrs。)

The informant is the wife of No。 77，worked in the same unit fromthe time they began constructing it in 1965 until they left for Hong Kongin November l983。 After finishing lower middle school she was assignedto the plant as a trainee, and for a while she studied technology andmanagement methods at a Shanghaichemicalfactorythat wastheonly plantin the country that had such advanced technology at that time。Herfather was a nationalist army officer and provincial official in Kunming,so she was denied admission to upper middle school。 (Her husband, itturns out，iis the son of a banker under the nationalists and suffered thesame fate)。§She saysthat nowthere is noofficialdiscrimination againstpeople with such bad class background, but that the prejudice still existsin the minds of the leading cadres。The policy is good now, they say,but who can tell what it will be in the future?It has changed back andforth continuously over the years, who can guarantee it will stay theSame?This is ultimately why they 1left， despite good jobs and new policiesthey apparently1 approve of wholeheartedly。She says that the people ofHong Kong cannot be assured of anything with regard to 1997 either, theywould be foolish to count on the words of the Chinese leaders, no matterhow sincerely they mean it now.

She worked as a production statistician in a workshop for the entire15 years that the plant was in operation, up to the time she left。She hada technician's grade.BonusesandReformPolicies

She stresses at the beginning the readjustment policy (zhengdun)。 Manyfactories in the Kunming area are closed.They were told to lower theircosts of production and begin making money, or change product lines, or elsetheywouldbeclosedpermanently，oratleasttemporarily。Many who failed

They always talked about this in her own factory.to do so were shut down.They all knewthat if the factoryy shut down, they would not get full paybutonly living expenses, or shenghuo fei, about.

At the beginning of the readjustment and reform they had no fixed bonuspolicy.They just gave everyone the same amount。Then they changed to

Theydistinguished people according tothe more work more pay system.fivelevels。First level was direct production workers who could makefrom 20 to 30 yuan per month。SSecond level were those staff and leadingcadre in shops and department directly related to production--production,

They made from 15 to 20 yuan.Thetechnical, planningdepartments,etc。third through fifth grades bonuses went down by 2 yuan each step, and theseincluded the support workers (cafeteria, etc.), the management workers infinance and general affairs， etc。People whowerenotdirectlyinvolvedwith production, whether mental or manual labor。

They gave out bonus money according to their progress in cutting downcosts of production and thereforecutting the enterprise's losses。 Ithad been a perennial money loser during the l970s。 If they lost lessthan the planning amount, they could keep part of that amount each yearas a bonus.This was divided by shops.They figured up series of bonusesfor saving on coal and other materials, and added them together to comeup with the above figures.They took off a fixed amount for each dayyou were absent as well.

(2)

Later they had floating bonuses.70% of the bonus was a fixedamount， 30 percent floated。1If you don't finish your quota, they tookaway from the bonus.Floating bonuses were in the technical shops wherethey had individual quotas。The above system was a group system usedin the continuous process chemical shops where everyone in the groupgot a bonus determined by their group and shop performance。 In thefloating bonus system, however, the bonus changed according to fulfillmentof quotas.，It was a fixed price per item。 Like a piece system exceptonly applied to part of the bonus, not basic wage。

This had a big effect on worker activism.'They got rid of eatingout of the same pot。They could get even more than a full bonus ifthey produced more。‘There were alwayss contradictions，of course。Thingscan't be fully worked out in advance.Some shops hadquotasthatcouldn'tbe met and they didn't get any bonuses。Whentheefactory was slow，orwaiting for materials, or simply didn't have much work for the technicalshop to do, then theycouldn't meet their work tasks。If there's no work,you can't overfulfill your quota.‘They don't know yet how to solve thisproblem。They would protest to us in the shop office about the unfairnessof it all, and we knew they had a reasonable complaint, but there reallywasn't much we could do about it。

The chemical shop bonus system had its own problems too。Theyranon a three shift system.1If the previous shift:left problems for the next,then they would suffer due to no fault of their own。They had to set upa good system of regulations in the production department for handing overwork to the next shift in the shop.

If they didn't hand over the workproperlyythentheytook awaymoney。

Also there was the problem with accidents。Theywouldfinethegroupfor an accident caused by negligence。They would also fine workers forsleeping, especially a problem on the night shift。If you were caught4 times no bonus at all。Whentheyimplementedthisnaturallytheworkershad a spirit of resistance。DuringtheCRbasicallyytheydidn't enforcerules at all， so it will take a while to get used to thisswayof doing

Yes,of course workers had opinions about this method ofthings again.fining workers, and they were unhappy about it。 But what could they do?If they didn't keep up they would lose money. Also everyone was workingunder the pressure of the knowledge that if they didn'treduce factorylosses they wouldclose down and then wouldlget shenghuofei and not theirfull wage。Later on, they did learn a sense of responsibility and losttheir fear of fines。

But there were some problems nonetheless。If you fined too much， theworkers couldn't take it。If the fine is too large then the worker can'tpossibly pay it back. If someone breaks a machine due to negligence theycouldnt'possibly pay for even l% of the cost.Theycould also give anadministrative punishment for negligent accidents。They could jiguoor liuchang chakan。

There was onlyone case of a man wholeft his workpost and causedan accident.He wasconvicted in court of negligence and 8given two yearsof supervised labor in the factory.Not many were fined, only a few.Mostly for sleeping or accidents, or doingg their own work, like knitting,taking care of children in the shop.

Upp to the time they left only one worker was fired in the post-77 period.A young worker who always was absent without leave, and when he did come

(3)

They gave him several warnings and gave himhe hardly worked at all.

Theyfinally fired him but the director firsteducation severaltimes。had to get permission from the bureau.Before l977 they wouldnever give permission for this。There were also some who were suspendedand on probation in the factory (liu chang cha kan)。It is still abig thing when they fire someone in China。That is considered a verygrave matter。It is not nearly so common as here in Hong Kong, where itis an everyday thing。VWhen they do it in China it is only after a longperiod of  attempts at education and repeated warnings。After theyfiresomeone it is recorded in their dangan and they are pretty much unemployableafter that， no one will want him。So theyonly do it after a long period.

They handled these things pretty well in our plant because they werea shidian, or experimental point factory.They were a special model ofthe industrial readjustment policies。The local papers praised us acouple of times for turningg loss into profit。People came to study ourexperience。‘They had finally tturnedtheir losses into profits。

They also had year end bonuses, limited to one month's salary.This wasaccordng to the amount of money you had economized during the year andretained。The money was earmarked in certain proportions for bonuses, and alsofor fringe benefits like housing, factory school, etc。Wage Readjustments

In 1978，40 percent of the young workers(husbandreportedincorrectlyearlier, but he agrees with this） were given, to production workers。Cond-itions:no connections with the Gang of Four,They had a campaign calledtthe "3 da jiang":JJiang qingchu l） your connections with the gang of 4;2） your CR activities，and 3) your economic crimes。The first criterionwas the year lines。 Then among the people who qualified they had secretballots within groups to decide who got it。The 60% who didn't get itwere very upset, because it had been such a long time.

In l979 or so, 2% were given a raise strictly according to outstandingwork contribution。They used tests。Workers hadnothing tosayabout whogot it。In 1980， 90 to 95% got a raise。This was given to almost allexcept those with discipline or political problems。In1983theybeganagain, and will be giving raises to all except those who don't come towork enough，or who have been punished。Theyalsohadsometestsforcaders for politics,ttechnical and management ability.

So many workers were given raises because they were a model enterprise,and had turned loss into profit.They had good performance and efficiency.Leading Group

When they consolidated the leading organs, they got rid of the oldrebel faction cadres (zaofan pai ganbu)。These were the ones promotedduring the CR, who didn't understand production methods.This was a case ofwaihandleadingneihang.They began to stress the neihang, theintellectuals. Their factory had a high technical level because most of theemployees were pre-68 high school students。Very few old cadres， except

Many cadres were 30-40 years old with good education,

few transfered in.aso they could improve their leading organ easily.TThey had many peopleto assume leading positions。They also had a number of pre CR college grads。They concentrated1 powers in the leading group of the factory.The directorhad the power to rearrange the leading group any way1 he pleased。  He didn'thave to listen to the head of the personnel department, it was the other way

(4)around。He needed the approval of the upper levels，but they almostalways gave their approval。 TThe party committee approved too, they had tolisten to his opinions because he was responsible for handling production.The party committee handled only sixiang.

To do things this way you need a director and party secretary whohave good relations and see thingsthe same way。They did,but otherunitss had serious problems in this area:tthe administrative and politicalsides formed into two factions。 In our factory, since the cadres were allfairly young, they accepted the new way of doingg things very readily.

The director and secretary didn't get along before they rose to the

But because they had a common goal, they put aside their personaltop。viewstoworkonthefactory's6 problems, and eventually got to see eye to

This was an ideal leading group because it was capable, young,eye.and united, interested in economic matters,Both the director and secretarywere around 40 years old。The director was a technical cadres and collegegraduate who was in the factory since it was built, and was gradually promoted.The party secretary was a demobilized soldier, an officer and a upper middleschool graduate who had a specialists grade.He had worked as an accountantandeventuallybecameheadofthefinancedepartmentCadre Elections

The secretary and director were democratically elected too。Theyhadthe elections inmid-l980。1Iftheyhadacadresentinfromabovethings wouldn't have worked out so well。‘Theearlierdirectorhadbeen

Both he and the old secretary were old cadres and hadsnetinfromabove。low cultural levels, not very capable。?Thatiswhy they lost money。 Theycarriedoutthedemocraticelectionsatthesametimeassthe reforms began,when Deng and Zhao became prominent.AAfterthattheoldd ones lost theirjobs and were sent to smaller factories， down one grade.

First the party members elected democratically five new members of

Then they had another election to elect a partythe party committee.

All were secret ballot。They prepared forsecretaryfrom amongthem..this election a longtime。

There was a long period of discussion。Theyhad elections, they picked out the top few and voted again。The olddirector and secretary were surprised at the outcome.

They thought：they

Theyhad done a good job。This was a suddenand unexpecteddevelopment.had no choice but to obeythe results because the upper levels were watching.They went to cadre training classes before being sent to another factory.They were an experimental point for elections。lIt was in the middle of 1980。

Only the factory director was elected on the administrative side，andthen he appointed all of the leading cadres under him.Our election andconsolidation of the leading group0 was successful,but in many other factoriesit was a failure because of fightsaamong the leading cadres.

The result was not the aim of the above levels.They didn't necessarilywantto get rid of these cadres。Nobody knew they would lose the election.

Preparations for the elections:They had a preparatory period, ayunniang shiqi, but not like before when they told us how to vote anddidn't have a secret ballot.The plant director was not evena party member。Andinfact allthe vice-directors anddept。headsheappointedwere notparty members either, except the heads of personnel and security.

Thisis very rare.No, they didn't write about this part in the papers.TTheyprobably didn't like it because the party was not at all responsible forturning things around。AAfterthedirectordidwelltheybegantopreparehimfor admission to the party.He had been applying for years but had alwaysbeen refused。  He had a small business class background.

(5)

Another reason why the local press may not have given much publicityto this is that they gave a lot of raises. They did publicize oursuccess, but not the composition of our leading group after the elections,or the election results.

描述：

