id: 278a20bae3
标题：Hong Kong Interviews: Informant No. 8
日期：1979-12-12,1979-12-18,1980-1-20,1980-3-18
是否是时间段：false
作者：Andrew G. Walder
来源：
标签：文章
书籍：Hong Kong Interviews: Informant No. 8
书籍作者：Andrew G. Walder

正文：
INFORMANT NO.8PERSONAL DATA

Sex:MaleAge:43

Technical college graduate (machinery)Education:Total Years Relevant Experience::18Last Year of Relevant Experience: l979

Year Left China:  1979Initial Immigration Status:LegalNative Place/Overseas Connections:

Cambodia 0S, returned 1954Class Background/Political Designation:

OS

OCCUPATIONAL HISTORY SUMMARYPositions Held: l) Electrician, Wuxi Diesel Engine Factory, l957-6l

2) Lab assistant, biology research institute, Wuxi, l96l-623)SStudent, Peking Machinery Institute, 1962-674) Peking Precision Machine Tool Plant, 1967-79

a) Electrician, repair shop, 1967-70b) Electrician, heat-treatment shop, 1970-73c) Shop technician, electrical equipment shop, 1973-75d)'borrowed' by Peking Municipal Machinery Bureau to

study electricity consumption in local industry,

1975-76e) Staff technician, Technical Department, Head of

electrical systems group, 1976-79Administrative Level of Work Unit/(No. of employees):

1) unknown/(1000)

4）Ministry until 1973, then Municipal/(500)Experience in Full-time Manual Labor (for non-worker occupations):

shop electrician, 1967-73APPOINTMENTS:4

TOTAL HOURS:9.25

PAGES TEXT:

8No.8Occupational History

(12/12/79, 2 hrs.)

The informant is an overseas Chinese, born in Pnomh Penh, Cambodia.In l954, at the age of 15, he returned to China. He attended the CantonRemedial School for Overseas Chinese for a few months, then was assigned toa middle school in Wuxi, Jiangsu province.He graduated in l957, and wasassigned to a diesel engine factory in Wuxi as an apprentice worker.Hedid this for three years, then became a skilled worker--an electrician.In l960 he was assigned to the electrical repairs shop of the factory.From l96l-2 he was borrowed by a research institute in the city todo experiments with food substitutes with a former biologyteacher of hisfrom middle school.

Thescientificresearch bureauselectedhimn to participatein these experiments designed to alleviate the widespread hunger in the cityas a result of agricultural failures of recent years.They experimentedwith various plant stalks and bark from trees.

In 1962 he sat for theexamination to enter technical college, and tested into the Peking MachineryCollege, and studied in the automatic control department. He graduated inl967, after which he was assigned to a Precision Machine Tool Factory inPeking run by the No. l Machine Building Industry.

Because it was goveriumentpolicy at the time, he worked as an electrician in a repair shop, and hiswork was to travel to other factories all over the country within the

His plant in PekingMinistry's system to repair: precision machine tools.wasaspecialone.In19700 he was transferred to a heat treatment shop(re chuli)， where he worked on heat meters.In 1973 the entire plant wastransferred to Peking Municipal administration.

Shortly1thereafter hewas transferred to the electrical equipment shop, and

he becamea technician in the shop office, where he drew up plans and gave workersinstruction..During l975-76 he was lent to the Peking Municipal MachinerYBureau to study electricity needs in the (cityandtheconsumptionofelectricity at several plants.

In 1976, aafter returning to his plant,he was promoted to the factory technical department, where he was thechief technician in charge of the plant's electrical system.

In February1979 he was given permission to come to Hong Kong.Apprenticeship and Wages at Wuxi Diesel Engine Plant：(12/18/79, 2 hrs.)

The plant had 1ooo employees.They made spare parts andassembled diesel engines.Informant did repair work on machines, lathes,and solved problems with electrical systems.He also did installing workfor electrical fixtures and wiring.

He doesn't remember much about theorganizational structure of the plant, it was long ago--before college.

His apprenticeship:

They got l8￥ per month the first year, andan increment of 2¥ per year for each of the next two years.It wasa3 yearapprenticeship period.

Their first week in the plant， the young workerswere given introductory classes, were introduced to different work processes,andsenttotheshopstosee.Then they progressed according to their abilities.After 3 years, they had a simple, formalistic test.Then the masters (shifu)met with the leading cadres to decide whogets promoted.

When you pass thetest, you get a certificate.For dangerous or sSpecial work, you take a testat the Municipal Department (ke) level.

After the tests, they have meetingsbetween the masters and cadres, and then meetings with all the apprenticesin attendance.

If you have worked hard, and your political thought is good,then you pass.

If you don't make any political 6errors, then you are assuredof passing.Thereafter you become a grade l worker, and after the end of2 more years, year 5 in the plant, you will be evaluated for raise to grade 2 .

-1-

Wage grades:First year apprentice,118¥， second, 20¥， third, 22¥,grade 1 worker, 32¥, grade 2， 40.5， grade 3， 47¥, grade 4， 55¥ ， and grade8, the highest for workers, was l08. Grade 8 workers can be given thetitle of engineer, but this is just honorary for old workers with goodtechnical skills, and they are still grade 8 workers. For engineers,the highest wage was 320￥, and the lowest 90¥. For college graduatetechnicians, the first years' wagee is 46¥， and the second year's 56¥.For middle-school level graduates, the first year wage is37¥， and thesecond year's wage is 43¥.1 After the cultural revolution the system ofraises and promotion for technicians changed, and people were promotedwithout raises--some people who were appointed engineer still made only50￥.

The informant graduated in 1967 from the university, and did thework of a worker during his first year, but received the first yearuniversityY graduate's wage of 46. After one year he was raised to56。！This was just part of the process of becoming a regular technician.In1978,hewasraisedone gradeto62¥.

College level technicians tended to work in department offices, whilethe middle-school graduates tended to work in shops6 at actual technicalrepair and inspection work. jIn the department offices, there was also adivision of labor between university level and middle-school level tech-nicians.!The univ.level ones tended to to planning, designing work,while the m.s. techs. tended to be assistants, helpers.

Raises were to be forthcoming once every twoyears, until after thecultural revolution began, when there were no more.When they had raises,the state would give each enterprise a percentage of the staff they could

Then the leaders would decide, set a list of names， and postgive raises to,them on a wall.call for opinions in meetings.Then a second list would beput up, sometimes revised as a result of massesopinions.

In 1977, therewas a readjustment, and there were two ways to get raises. First hadto do with length of service.

A person who had been in the factory since1958, and was still grade two, would be raised a grade, except for about2% who made political errorsl  sSecond was merit.Amongthose left over,40% would be raised based on assessmentssof their work performance andalsobasedsomewhatonlengthofserviceeandcurrentwages.

They stillfavored veteran workers with low wages here too.

Each small：group meetsand discusses each workers' contribution, and draws up a name list to giveto the shop.

The whole process was accompanied by intensive politicalstudy for one month before and during the list-making and revising process.The lists6goupthrough thedifferent levels as namesare siftedout,and finally to the wage committee of the entire plant which draws upa name list and posts on the board for mass opinions.Thefinaldecisionis made by party and union cadres, and leading administrative cadres.In practice, the work groups tend to nominate too many workers, becauseit is hard to distinguish individual'ssperformance.sSo the real jobof weeding out names falls to the shop levels and above.

As the list movesup each level, a certain number of names are weeded out.

The shop leadersare able to weed out names because they know each worker and have theirrecords.

During l957-60, they had tests for workers once a year.

They testedboth technical abilities and knowledge.But lower wage people tended totake these tests more often.After 1967, and up until 1975 or s0, therewere no opportunities through tests, or through any other method, to get araise.The readjustment in l975 was separate from the one in 1978 (couldhe mean 77 and 79?i-he is generally unclear on dates, and asking does notseem to help.

-2-Bonuses(1/20/80, 3 hrs.)

Bonuses depended on the type of work.They are figured differentlydepending on how many products you make, things you install,etc.EBeforetheCultural Revolution, the highest bonus could be higher than one's monthlywage.'There was no bonus, however, if you didn't meet the basic quota.Assessments for bonuses took place in the work groups.The smallest bonus

During and after the Cultural Revolution, they changed towas a few yuan.a supplementary wage (fujia gongzi), where everyone got the same amount,about4-6¥permonth.

They had piece rates，but only for installing andsimilar work, and also in the collective factories--but only before theCultural Revolution.Firings

This is usually only done as alegal measure,for someone who makesan error in political or social life.  It is handled by the security section.People can also be demoted a grade or so for these kinds of errors.:Stealing,having illicit relations with women, and other errors are the kinds of thingsyou can be punished for. If you are fired, it is hard to get a permanent jobassignment again because your past mistake is in your file.‘ So usually youget temporary work. But this occurs only very rarely. It almost neverhappens because of bad work.The usual treatment for bad work is notto give raises or bonuses.Temporary and Contract Labor

Contract workers tend to be people with some technical skills.They can sign contracts for as long as one or two years.Temporary workersare more short-term.There are two ways of finding these kind of workers.First you notify the labor bureau which notifies the street committee.Second, you can call a friend at a street committee office to arrangeintroductions and then call the labor bureau later for approval.?Therewere very few temporary or contract laborers in his factories, at most3%. FAbout l0-20 were there all the time, and the rest were contractlaborers who expanded in number as needed.TThere were no changes at all inthis system of hiring, with the exception of the Cultural Revolution, whenthings were tighter, there were fewer jobs.1Afterwards, so many intellectualyouths wanted to work, so the system of temporary labor was more tightlyrestricted and controlled.

Temporary workers'wages wereffairly high, but no fixed scale,no supplements, no sick pay, no labor insurance. So their wages were about50-lo0% higher thanregular workers.They also had political study sessionswhich were led by permanent workers.Contract workers were in the samesituation--wages relatively high, few to no fringe benefits.Temporarylaborers tended to do relatively bitter kinds of work, while contract workers,since they often had some technical skill, had better kinds of work.

For example, if a certain job was being done and was being handledslowly by permanent workers, then the leader will call over a temporaryworker andwillget the jobdonefaster.The reason is that if the temporaryworker goofs off, he's out of a job. But the permanent worker can takehis time, can refuse to do certain kinds of jobs and there is nothing acadre can do except raise a criticism.There was no basic change in thesystem--either in its frequency of use or in the treatment of workers--while the informant worked in China.Three-in One Technical Innovation Groups

These groups worked well.  Leading cadres, technicians, and workersparticipated.TThere was an advantage to having cadres in this group, because

-3-then the group can get materials more easily.The leadingcadres decide whento form these groups.1I participated in one such group.An ionization furnacefor heat treating metals worked too slowly, and was a 'key point' (guanjian)holding up the production process.A few cadres, the informant, and someold skilled workers cooperated and came up with a process to reduce the heatingprocess from one week to l2 hours or so, but the leadership, in the finalanalysis, did not adopt the method because they were afraid that if it didn'twork they would be criticized by the upper levels, so they let it go.

There are no fixed memberships for these groups.

Their size andpersonnel change according to demands.People make their contributions andleave.  I says this method is effective.Workers cooperated well andmade valuable suggestions.They used work time to meet, and the sizeand membership of the group changed according to what they were doing.

They went to other places to visit and learn about new experiences,1)and theyI went to information bureaus (qingbao ju)to read foreign materials,and went to other plants and research institutes involved in the same sortofwork.2）They take things back to their unit to read.3) They make plans,designs, and call in skilled workers to help fabricate the new equipment.The informant participated in these kinds of groups almost: continuously.They used this form from the late 1950s onward, and it was verycommonplacewhen one ran into a key problem they had to attack (gong guan).

Thebasic method, in reality, is that the leading cadres do logistics (houqin)work for the group, providing it with what it needs.

Workersactasassistantsto the technicians, and as consultants.

Theseecadres6 are important, becauseif a technician asks for materials there iis no way he will get them fromthe stores, but if a cadre requests them, they comply immediately.

Theonly difference in this form throughout this period was that during theCultural Revolution, if any technician had a political problem then hewouldn't be picked to participate--this was something of a special honor.Great Leap Forward

There were a number of unreasonable changes in technical innovations.,in production methods, and in the speed of production.At that time, theyoung and inexperienced often supported the policy--they wanted to buildChina fast and surpass England.

But many intellectuals, technicians, andolder workers had scientific knowledge and knew these methods wouldn't work.But duringthe Great Leap veryfewdaredtospeakup.

They would be labelledconservativeandcriticized.But bythetimeoftheGreat Leap mostofthesetypes of people had already been intimidated by the Anti-Rightist movementof July to September·1957.IDuring that period anyone who criticized theParty and its methods or line were not only labelled rightists and conserv-atives, but stripped of jobs, and had their children's futures jeopardized--from job assignments to university admissions.Cultural Revolution

There were two factions in the (Peking) plant with outside alliancestoother factions.At first, the conservative faction tended to be thosewith good class background (chushen).But later there were no clear differencesbetween members, and people seemed to join those factions that had power.Cadres with historical problems were struggled every day, were made to dothe'airplane', were locked up and not allowed to return home.Some worea heavy iron placard around their necks, and others were also paraded aroundthe streets.

They stood aside and were replaced by faction leaders.Thesepeople originally were ordinary workers.

Duringg the period where there weretwo factions, each faction leader could only give orders to his own people.

After a period of haggling unsuccessfully over the 'alliance group

-4-(lianhe zu). which was to unite several factions and resume production,army representatives came around l968.  Once thee Revolutionary Committeewas formed under army direction, there were nine members--l army representative,2 old cadres, and 6 representatives from the two factions (3 from each).

The establishment of the RevolutionaryCommitteedidn't completelysolve problems.They still had factional conflict for a while within the

Workers wouldn't listen to leaders from others factions. Sinceshops.I didn't come to the plant until after college in l967， he didn't joineither faction.He was a member of the 'middle of the road' faction(zhong jian pai), which included about lo% of the workers.

WhyIwere such a high proportion of workers aligned with one factionor another??For self-protection. It was a necessity.1If you were a memberthen the members of the group would protect you.

The army withdrew around l972, after things were put in order.They didn't leave in some factories until 1976 or so.The two old cadreson the Revolutionary Committee were former party secretaries, and theyinitially were vice-heads of the RC.The other leading cadres--departmentheads, etc.--were appointed based on the relative strength of the factions.One department head would be the member of one faction,while thevice-headwould be a member of the other faction.

These people usually had notechnical knowledge.

TheyhadelectionsintheaftermathoftheCulturalRevolution, but they were formalities.The armyrepresentatives actuallydecided who would become leaders.They usually used a show of hands,but sometimes had a secret ballot.  At this time there was no Party Committee.It was not revived until l975 or so.This was handled internally, with noparticipation by non-Party members.

When forminggthe Revolutionary Committee,old cadres who had beencriticized often were transferred to new plants to avoid embarrassment, and

Thesenew ones came in from elsewhere.There was a lot of this at the time.people would become leading cadres in their new units.

The new leaders promoted during thecultural revolution held theirpositions right up until 1977-78, when they were often make 'assistant' (fu)leading cadres at the same level, ffor example they would become viceshop directors or vice department heads, instead of directors or heads.The highest leaders of factories were often declared counter-revolutionaryfor their crimes, and became ordinary workers.  The middle level cadresoften kept their jobs.Cultural Revolution changes in Administration

At one point about twothirdsof the technicaldepartment cadres weresent down to the shops for manual labor or to work in shop offices.Beforethe CR almost all major technical problems were sent to the staff departmentto handle.1After the Cultural Revolution, only a couple of people were leftin the technical department.  Gradually people were transferred back afterwards.For example, before the CR they had over 20 staff members of the department,but they reduced this to 5-6 at one point, and later abolished the departmentaltogether and transferred all its personnel and functions to the shops.They did not re-establish the technical department until l975.

The advantages to this reform was that it became easytohandle rela-tivelysimple technical problems much more quickly, since the experts wereonthe floor andthere was nowaiting while the department was notifiedand a response made.But the reform was disadvantageous for the all-sideddevelopment of production in the plant, since there was no overall coordinationon larger questions.Theyalsoendedupwithntoo many technicians in eachshop to do the necessary technical work, when at most times l person woulddo.This made for inflexible use of technical personnel at the all-plantlevel.For example, if a major problem pops up in one shop requiring a

-5-number of technicians，tthey couldn't all be dispatched there because theywere tied down in the various shops.Those peopleleftintheplant-leveloffices were unable to handle all the problems sent up to them--there werenot enough people.So generally they didn't handle technical planning workwell, nor did they do a good job of overall coordination.

They could notdo preparatory work and plan for the future.They could not coordinateoverall technical repairs and renovation.They ended up having people in theshops fix things as they broke down.Peking Precision Machine Tool Plantt(3/18/80, 2.25 hrs.)

The main work of the plant was to l) accept machinery for majorrepairs from other plants, 2) send out technical workers and techniciansto other places to conduct repairs and inspections.They had shops,departments, and were organized just like any other factory.They weredirectly under the leadership of the No. l Machine Building Ministry--whichhandled cars, agricultural machinery, machine tools.There were eight bureauunder it.His plant was under the Machine Tools Bureau (ji chuang ju),and it handled the most serious kinds of machinery breakdowms in thatbureau system, but sometimes helped other ministiies if they had approvalfrom the bureau.

They were the only such repair plant in the bureau.

The plant had about 5oo in its staff of employees.About lo% wereadministrative cadres, and about 80% workers.They had gone over thedesired number of non-production (tuochan) staff in the plant.

When Ifirst went there, he did 3 years of work in the shops as an electrician(this was during theeCultural Revolution,l967-70)，then later was sent

In l97l he was sent to be a shop technical cadrebacktoofficework.in the equipment and power shop (shebei, dongli).1He was in charge ofinstalling monitoring and repairing the plant's equipment, and making surethat powerC systems worked. He would dispatch workers to do the needed work.There were four technicians, and 5 people to do administrative work. Thiswas not a production shop but a 'service' (fuwu) shop.

He was assigned to the plant technical department in l974, and handledelectrical power systems for the entire plant.

He also did some designingand planning work, and also checked plans for technical innovations, technicalprocesses, to approve that they were rational from the standpoint of electricalsupply.Politics.. and Administration

They were criticized commonly before the Gang of 4 fell, and had2 factions within the plant. Where did the factions come from? They beganduring the Cultural Revolution.At first, the two factions could be dis-tinguished accordingg to class background (chushen).1People with goodbackgrounds were 'royalists' (baohuang pai), while people with bad backgroundswere rebels(zaofan pai).Later, because the large number of people in themiddle wanted to protect themselves, tthey joined different factions, and thenthere was no basic difference in the membership of the 2 factions.

Later, during the l970s, they still had factions in ideology (sixiang),but no organizations.They also had friendships and connections which builtup, and also some animosities, gaps between people.This tended to influencethe positions that people were promoted to, and whether or not they were promotedto leading positions.AAlso, sometimes engineers would refuse transfers intodepartmentsbecauseethey harbored animosities toward the department head whowas a member of the opposing faction during the CR .

This one particulardepartment head had been a rebel faction leader, and had been promoted after-wards to department head, where before he had been an ordinary staff member.

These kinds of factional relations showed up during the l970s in

-6-virtually everything, and it continues up to the present. It becomes manifestin work assignments, in work groups, in assessments for raises and bonuses.Also in1 the top leadership, it involves promoting your own people, and pullingthem up with you.  You can't really saythese factions are defined by politicalviewpoints, but that they're defined by bonds of mutual interest (liyi guanxi).In his own group this problem was especially serious. His department headand vice-head were in different factions, and there was constant preferentialtreatment in work assignments and promotions by the head. I was lucky tohave been on the good end of all this.

Technical cadres were afraid to take risks, since they were indanger of being criticized.TThey didn't want to commit to a decision unlessthey were sure of its success.

Theydidn'tcommitthemselvesloo%totheirwork, and tried to get out of responsibility if they could.There was nogain to be had by doing a good job--there were no bonuses, no raises, nopromotions--and there would always be the danger of being criticized for makingmistakes by people in the other faction. GenerallyY speaking. many techniciansheld animosity toward those who criticized them forflimsy reasons, andwho were less qualified than they were.This influenced their work attitudes.

What kinds of things wereethey criticized for?For being bourgeoisintellectuals, not being as good as the laboring masses, etc.Even if theydidn't make a mistake, technicians would have to make up something for a self-criticism to head off others.(Generally, criticisms were not that seriousunless you had a historical problem.Then these people with bad familyconnections, rightist, etc., would be interrogated by the security departmentof the plant， kept without food, sleep for days, and put in isolation.This happened to 3 people in his plant who were accused of participatingin the April 5 Tiananmen incident in l976.

They also had criticisms ofLin Biao , Confucius.

When orders came dowm to criticize a certain type of person, it justdidn't do to claim that the plant had no such sort of people.SSotheyhadto seleet somebody for criticisms, and this usually ended up being the peoplewith the suspicious class backgrounds.They: also had to criticize peopleaftertheGangof4fell.Onepoliticalworkcadrewascriticizedandremoved，because he had expressed doubts about whether or not Hua Guofeng would lastvery long as premier.Not an awful lot of people were demoted during thistime--they just lost power, were no longer given work to do, and became'vice' head of whatever unit they were leading.Or they were transferredto another department, especially if they were being protected by somebodyabove.This tended to increase the number of department heads (counting thenew heads and new vice-heads).

Generally speaking, people in leading positions who had no committedserious errors were not demoted. During this period there were also avery small number of people restored to leading psitions who had earlierstood up to the Gang of 4.Afterthe Gangof Four

First they hadl criticisms of former followers of the gang--2 types.First were the former murderers and ringleaders duringg the cultural revolution.The criminals were punished and sometimes removed from the plant.SSecond,the 'helicopters' of the CR who rose up quickly without qualifications.These kinds were taken out of leadership positions (but they kept their wages)and became regular workers or technicians.The people taking their placeswere old cadres, or youth who dared oppose the gang of 4, some of whom wereintellectuals.

There was some resistance to this policy.IPeople would get together

-7-informally to hide their former complicity.Therewassomeresistanceamong leaders in units, who didn't really carry through the policy becauseit would endanger themselves and their own 'people', so often they wouldsend a work team or a powerful person from above to help carry through thepolicy.:Sometimes people would escape being rooted out and would insteadbe transferred, simply because they would have friends at the upper level.Generally speaking, all gradually carried out this policy because the upperlevels would eventually find out, but the policy was slowed down.

In his plant during l977-78, they removed about l0% of the totalleaders in the plant from leadership positions. But in other cases, whensomeone above was watching out for someone, then they got transferred.Butin other cases, young Gang-of-4-following leaders would only be demoted tothe 'vice' position, meaning that when the old cadre would come back asthe head, there would be an increase in the number of leaders.Elections

At about the time he left, they were in the midst of democraticelections to select new cadres.:They started with small groups and wentup to the level of shop director.They used secret ballots, and had morethan one candidate for the office.1During that period they studied theYugoslav experience in their study groups.He is familiar with the Yugoslavsystem--the management committees, the election of shop directors, etc.,so it is obvious he has studied it. People working in departments electedtheir heads. Workers also had the power to select a new plant director if he wswas not doing a good job, if there were poor profits, low bonuses.

They were also planning to establish a workers' committee (gongrenweiyuanhui)， along Yugoslav lines.They had already set a schedule for imple-menting this in their plant, which was an 'experimental plot' in late l978.It is unclear whether this meant

the workers' congress, or another bodythat was to supervise top management, but: according to the Yugoslav experiencethis would be the later.He is generally vague about these future plansfor elections and committees.

He left before the results of the elections.?They hadonly just begunthe assessments in small groups when he left. A document had just come downsaying that they should implement these things.  The process went slowiy.The Partycommittee still had the power tocancel the results of elections.Bonuses

They began again after the Gang of 4 fell.The plant as a whole wasgiven an amount of money to split up.Each month, also yearly.1At thebeginning, cadres were afraid to use bonuses, so they bought pots and otherhousehold items to give workers. Later they gave out money, and divided theawards into 3 grades--3¥， 5¥， 7￥.This was assessed in each work group.The criteria--work contribution, attendance, no political criteria.In his unit, everybody was polite, and used a rotating system to make surethat everybody would get a chance at a high bonus.But workers foughtovereverydollar.There were no bonuses during the Great Leap Forwardearlier when he worked in Wuxi.

-8-

描述：

