id: ac5fb2afd5
标题：Hong Kong Interviews: Informant No. 16
日期：1980-3-27
是否是时间段：false
作者：Andrew G. Walder
来源：
标签：文章
书籍：Hong Kong Interviews: Informant No. 16
书籍作者：Andrew G. Walder

正文：
INFORMANT NO. 16PERSONALDATA

MaleAge: 32

Sex:Education:Primaryschool graduate

16Total Years Relevant Experience:Last Year of Relevant Experience: l979

Year Left China: 1979Initial Immigration Status:  LegalNative Place/overseas Connections:

Guangdong native/os ties unknownClass Background/Political Designation:

unknown

OCCUPATIONALHISTORYSUMMARYPositions Held: l) Painter, Arts and Crafts collective, Xinhui, Guangdong,

1964-712)Worker, Soy Sauce and Vinegar Factory, Xinhui, l9713) Itinerant painter, Xinhui,l972

4) Painter, Arts and Crafts collective, Xinhui, l972-79Administratiye Level of Work Unit/(No. of employees):

1) Village (zhen),collective/(grew from l0 to 90)2) Village/(200)

4) Village, collective/(100)APPOINTMENTS:1

PAGES TEXT:TOTALHOURS:2

3No. 16Occupational History (3/27/80, 2 hrs.)

The informant graduated from primary school and started work at theage of 14. He lived in the town of Xinhui, Guangdong province, whichwas a county seat.After graduation from primary school in 1962, he decidedhe would like to study art, so he was apprenticed to a painter, a friendof his father's, who worked for a construction company but was a painterin the past.This man taught the informant how to paint in his spare timefor three months.He refers to this man as his 'master'((shifu).]It wasvery hard to get into middle school.

Theyhadtestss and also politicalcriteria.The informant was of overseas background, and his class backgroundwas not black, but it was not 'red' either.

Anyway only1 20% of the primaryschool graduates in the towm got into middle school, and he didn't make it.Most of the youths in the town did odd jobs (san gong)， and tried to learna few skills.Most of the industry in town was handicraft, and the mainproduct was traditional fans for export.

So he lived in his master's home, and learned painting in his sparetime.This wasduringg the 3 difficult years, in the early 60s, and hisparents sent him to live in this man's house, who also had a wife anddaughter.This was arranged on the basis of personal sympathiess(siren gan).After these 3 months, he returned to his father's house to study painting onhis own.

He became good enough to be certified by the village (zhen)laborservice station.

He was then given a license to be an iindependent (geti)portrait painter.

He hung his work on the street, and sold it.He did thisfor 2 years.They took a tax from his income, and a management fee of 2¥ permonth.He forgetshow much the tax was. He made about 45¥ per month.

Before the cultural revolution, in late l964 or 1965, this kind ofindividual workk was declared against the law, was the capitalist road,so they were forced to organize into a comprehensive cooperative of allthe individual peddlers in the town--sewing, keymaking, painting, hawking.

The people in each typeThey were organized by the labor service station.of business organized into groups (zu)， and each group did different workin different locations.He was in the fine artsgroup.This was a smallcollective.They also had large collectives6 and state-run collectives.

This began his factory experience in China.1Hiscollectivelatergrew into a factory, was later disbanded, and he moved around for briefstints in a variety of small plants for the next l5 years in Xinhui.Hecame to Hong Kong legally in l979, September, and now has a small portraitgallery in Hong Kong.Work Units and Experience in Xinhui, l975-79

His small collective in Xinhui established a work point systemfor deciding how much to pay each member.Each person was rated on al-l0 scale, and the highest possible wages was 50, the lowest possible10-15¥.Each point was worth about 5.They decided by discussing at ameeting, and differences were based on technical ability, and also on theamount of work done.

They have from 5-6 people in their group at any giventime.

They continued like this for about a year, then his groupwaschanged into a factory at the beginning of the cultural revolution.Theychanged from a service to a production unit.They started out with 20, andgradually grew to about 90 employees.The village sent in a factory director,under the directionof the 2zhen.

They made oil paintings, statues, and medals.In his group, the salary was not stable, but in this factory the salarywas fixed, based on what it had been before.

The lowest was l8¥, highest 50¥.-1-But the salary was stable and did not fluctuate from month to month, likeitdidintheearliercollective.

He worked in this collective factory until l97l, and then the plantdispersed because the items they made--Mao quotation badges, plaster bustsand statues of Mao--were no longer in demand.  So he was sent to a soysauce factory in l97l.

During the CulturalRevolutiontheydid haveproblemswithfactionalismand organizations among the workers, but there was no fighting or armed struggle.Production slowed, and sometimes even stopped.

At that time they had 90 or so

One party secretary, 2 plant directors, 2 shop directors.workersandstaff.Also group leaders, and a few political cadres and some business staff.

The leadership was split into two factions, and they aligned with

Each mobilized its owm faction.theetwodifferentfactionsofworkers.They had mass criticism,they put hats on leading cadres, and put them ona stage and criticized them.

All theecadresstoodasideatthattime.

Thenproduction became verylax (suibian)， kind of took its own course.Thencentral policies changed, and the leaders were said to be not capitalistroadersafterwards.A document came down and things changed.The cadreswho had the biggest contradictions with the workers were transferred elsewhere,and others who didn't have great problems were put back in their ola jobs.New leading cadresS were transferred in from other units, and other new cadreswere promoted from amongg the most active faction leaders.

After the situationstabilized, though, these faction leaders were sent back to production work.

There were in fact 3 factions among the workers, if you count thosein the middle who didn't have much interest.This was thee'unattached'faction (xiaoyao pai), and there were many with bad class backgrounds

Theothertwofactionsclaimedtobetheonlyleftists.Heamong them.could not tell who was really left.The younger workers tended to be morewilling to criticize leaders and seize power.

The ones with the best classbackground tended to be faction leaders.Old workers generally ignored thewhole thing.

The informant claims that having workers runnthecollectivewasbetterbecause they understood the business better, and the collective developed fasterwhen they had workers running things before the state declared it a factoryand sent in cadres.Later when it became a factory they had all thesecadresandpartysecretariessent inwhodidn't understandanythingaboutthe work they were doing there.

He worked in the Soy Sauce and Vinegar Factory for about half a year,then applied to resign, because this was only manual labor.This factory wasalso under the village.

They were paid by grades here, a five grade scale,and were considered a large collective (da jiti)--were not state-owmed at thattime.There were about 200+ workers.

Then he worked in a yeast factory for half a year, after that heleft after another half year, and went back to working on his owm, painting.He did illegal private painting of portraits, and taught people how to paint

After one year of this he established another painting group.for afee.After about 9 months they developed fairly well, So finally in l976 theyonce again turned it into a collective factory to produce these kinds ofart objects.This collective had about loo workers, had a plant director and

He was in a leadership position, and handled production.party secretary.He was in effect in charge of operations because the 2 leaders sent in by thevillage government didn't understand art production.

They went through several party secretariess in this collective, inpart because they had differences with the director, and also because they had

-2-no experience in the arts and just weren't interested. So production didn'tdeveloptoowell.

The wages were not on an 8 grade scale here either. This was onlyfor county level factories and above.  They had about 6 grades, the lowestwas 22¥, the highest 45¥. They did not really have fixed,formal grades,but they were just paid different wages, based on when they entered

the plant and what kind of work they did.三

描述：

