id: 282321c1cc
标题：Hong Kong Interviews: Informant No. 2
日期：1979-11-16,1979-11-19,1980-1-11,1980-1-22,1980-1-24,1980-1-26,1980-2-5,1980-2-7,1980-3-1,1980-5-13,1980-5-17,1980-5-20
是否是时间段：false
作者：Andrew G. Walder
来源：
标签：文章
书籍：Hong Kong Interviews: Informant No. 2
书籍作者：Andrew G. Walder

正文：
INFORMANT NO. 2

PERSONAL DATAAge: 48

Sex: MaleEducation:University Graduate (Qinghua, chemistry), 2 yrs. post-grad.Total Years Relevant Experience:26Last Year of Relevant Experience: l979

Year Left China: 1979Initial Immigration Status: LegalNative place/Overseas Connections:

Hebei/wife Thailand OS

staff (zhiyuan)Class Background/Political Designation:

OCCUPATIONAL HISTORY SUMMARYPositions Held;  l) Instructor, Lecturer, Peking Petroleum Institute, l954-6l

2) Chemical Engineer, Peking Light Industrial Bureau, l96l-79

a) Staff engineer, Bureau Technology Department, 196l-62b)Vice Department Head, Planning-Technical Department,

Peking Furfural Factory, 1962-65.）Staff engineer, Research office of Technical Department,

Peking Household Chemical Plant, l962-65d） Production worker, Peking Household Chemical Plant,

1966-72e) Research engineer, Light Industry Bureau Research

Institute, 1972-79Administrative Level of Work Unit/(No. of employees)

1）Ministry2b)@300

2c, 2d) 600Experience in Full-time Manual Labor (for non-worker occupations):

Shop production worker, 1966-72APPOINTMENTS: 12

TOTAL HOURS:  21.5

PAGES TEXT:

23No.2Occupational History(11/16/79, 2 hrs.)

His father was a teacher at a technical school, taught engineering,and had earlier graduated from Peking Univ.1His family chengfen is zhiyuan(staff). He also has two brothers who went to universities in Peking.Oneis a scientist, another is an artist and musician who works in the Ministryof Education.He lived with his family in Peking--was comfortable, but not

during the Japaneserich.He went to middle school in Peking in the l940sS

He attended a school run by Christian missionaries from the US,occupation.and the principal was a Harvard Ph.D.From 194l-45 the middle school hada Japanese political officer in charge, and the missionaries, who had fledearlier, returned after 1945.In l947 he graduated, and tested into 3different universities--Yanjing, Zhongfa (Sino-French), andl Qinghua.Heattended Qinghua, and had completed 3 terms by the time the CCP marchedinto the city in February 1949.1He graduated in l95l from the ChemicalEngineering Department.  lHeenteredgraduate school, studying for 2 yearsfrom 1951-3.By l954, he graduated from the College of the Petroleum Industrywhich had in the meantime split off from a Qinghua department.1He has readingknowledge of English and Russian..1He had Russian professors during thisperiod who taught engineering courses in Russian.

From 1954-56 he was an assistant instructor at the Petroleum Industrycollege., where he had earlier graduated. In 1956 he was promoted tolecturer, where he also began doing laboratory experiements, and lecturedon petroleum refining.

He taught, published papers.His responsibilitiesin the Petroleum Ministry were to translate books into Chinese for publication,and to do planning work on how to develop the petroleum industry over the

The results of conferences on this topic, and position paperslong run.were sent to the Ministry in charge.

In 1957 the government changed.1 Politics became more important.This is because the 2oth congress of the CFUSSR made criticisms of Stalinthat gave China a shock.Thereafter they had to spend more time on politics,

In the anti-rightist campaign many of his friendsreading and discussing.were criticized, because duringg the loo flowers period they had criticizedthe Party's faults.

They were subsequently criticized in groups in theircollege.

At that time China's intellectuals, formerly quite approvingof the CCP, began to have their doubts about the Party.Each day intellectualshad to spend time on politics in addition to business responsibilities.Theycouldn't just do their work, they would be criticized.

In l958 the Great Leap Forward started. It had no achievements,because it was impossible to raise suggestions or criticisms of it once itwas underway.1Also, the CCP exaggerated the accomplishments in the midst ofthe GLF.  Also, if you did your work to the exclusion of politics you would

wasreorganized,once again becriticized.jIn l96l his industrial collegeand many were sent to the Northeast, to Daqing.  He asked to be transferredto a factory in Peking, because he didn!t want to leave his family.Theyagreed, and transferred him to the Peking Light Industry Bureau.

From l96l-66 he worked in the city's light industry system as achemical engineer, and moved around to several different factories in thesystem, as needed bythe bureau.He worked in several different chemicalfactories as an upper-level technician.

Inl966unti1 1972 he was not allowedtodotechnicalwork.1Hekept the title of engineer, but worked in workshops at manual labor in thePeking Detergent and Soap Factory.At that time he was the head of theresearch department, but. the department ceased work entirely.

He was aspecial worker. When they needed a technician they asked him to help out.

-1-In effect, he was an engineer without title. From l972-79(March), he returnedto office work.During l972-3 he worked in a technical office in the factory;but in l973 he returned to a research institute in the system, where hestill had frequent contacts with factories in the system.He came to HongKong legally in mid-l979.Industrial College Experience, l954-6l

His industrial college was under the Education Ministry, while thefactories he hed contact with were under the Petroleum Ministry.There wereconnections between thecorlegeeand the petrochemical factoriesand

collegerefineries in the Ministry system.  First, some graduates of theworked in these factories later as technicians.SSecond, students studyingoften went to these factories to practice in production, and get practicalexperience. (This often disrupted production because there were too manystudents at once, but the industrial ministry ordered it).Third, studentsand teachers together went to these factories to study production problems,come up with suggested solutions. To do this, they often held meetingswith workers. Prevalent form was to have shop leaders convene meetings andsolicit suggestions from workers and students.1Usually.about l0 workers,10 students.

Leaders of shops have the power to decide when to implement

But after l958 this situation changed gradually in differentsuggestions.parts of the country.Powerwent tothePartyin1958-66,andtherewasa transitional period here where the party branch of the shop decided suchtechnical questions.  Fourth, experts from the

collegewent to the ministrytoattend meetings and discuss various aspects of the development of .thepetroleum industry.Meetings included representatives from factories, ministryplanning departments, and research institutes and colleges.GreatLeapForward

There were actually 2 great leaps forward. One in l958 when theybuilt a small steel furnaee in the institute courtyard, and one in l960whenheoftenwenttofactorieswithhisstudents.During this periodfactories were in disorder, workers using native methods were messing thingsup.They built steel furnaces in courtyards, worked very hard but withno results.They wasted a lot of time and effort.

Things that went on in factories， according to his knowledge:Shop leaders were ignored when it came time to implement the mass movement.The shop party branch simply overrode their orders.

The party committeeand branch secretary therefore made decisions about plans, product changes,

Their decisions didn't fit scientific principles.etc.without consultation.Workersandcadresweremakingdecisionsbasedonthinunderstandingofscience, under the guise of "sweeping away superstition" (pochu mixin).

Thiswas a prominent political slogan of the time.

There were many meetings.If a shop head or a technician opposeda certain innovation or change, they would be criticized in these meetings.If the person continued to insist his criticisms were correct, he would

be relieved of his duties (stand aside--kaobian zhan). He stillreceived his salary. had his post, but there was no way to do the workhe was trained to do.

No power， no work.1Nothing to do--just read books,attend meetings, etc.

But people very rarely went this far in theiropposition. Political pressures were too great.

Political pressure (zhengzhi yali).1By this he means the politicalatmosphere (qihou) that pervades the small group study meetings.)You can'toppose suggestions, or you will be criticized.}Yet you can't keep silentif you disagree. If you keep silent, the group leader will point out your

-2-non-participation, and direct criticism your way, trying to draw you intocommitting yourself.sSo basically, you have to approve.

Buttherearetwo ways to approve.First, you can become an  activist--volunteer tospeak, approve aetively.(Or you can just acquiese, in which case you will

Most intellectuals opposedstill be criticize for supporting too passively.this sort of method, but didn't dare speak out.

Workers usually broke down into three groups of opinion duringthis movement.1First were those who had the same opinion as most intellectuals.These were experienced or skilled workers who knew these kinds of 'technicalreforms' would not work, but could not speak out.. Second, there were thosewho just did not care, they collected their pay checks and went home.Third,there were the activists (jiji fenzi)）andbackbones(gugan）who，becauseof ignorance, naivete, youth, and sometimes opportunism, agreed with theparty and actively take part in the technical reform movement.(Opportunistsare those who get promoted to group head, section leader, shop leader， andvice plant director after proving their worthiness in these way over a periodof time.There were not many of these types during the GLF, but they becamemoreeimportant during the Cultural revolution.1But this wastheperiodwhen this situation began to develop.

These were people whoaaimed to'crawl upward" (xiang shang pa).Opportunists in leadershippositions didnot have any technical knowledge, so they survived in office by exploitingthe knowledge of two kinds of people::1）those with technical eexpertiseand scientific knowledge; 2)experienced workers. They 'made use of' thesepeople (liyong).Most workers and intellectuals did not like the opportunists,but the opportunists nonetheless used their abilities to get by.(11/19/79, 1.5 hrs)

In fact， at the beginning of the GLF, a lot of workers and intellectusapproved of it, but experience proved otherwise, and quickly had doubts.Afterwards they learned that one formula does not work for the whole country.When the first bad results became apparent, people were sorted into severalcategories based on their opinions.First, were the good people, the'promoters of progress' (cujin pai).The party wanted everyone to beelikethis.Then there were three bad groups.

The 'retreaters' (cutui pai),the 'watchers of the tide' (guan chao pai), those who just watched, didn'tparticipate actively or offer opinions, and the 'qiuhou suanzhang pai',those whodidnt believe in the GLF and wanted to'settle accounts afterthe autumn harvest'--these last people typically said they would notcommit themselves to an opinion until after seeing final results.Thegood group were referredatoas people who wanted to stay"atop the horse"(shangma), while the bad groups were those who wanted to）'dismount'(xiama).Although political pressures were applied during the GLF, they were nottoosevere.There was no firing, no lowering of salary, but there wasa lurking fear that one's opinion would place them in the category of"enemy-people contradiction".

Political pressure was applied in political study groups, ineveryday work, neighborhoods, and wherever interaction is thick.  Reportson individuals are made by cadres and entered into files.Everybody livestogether communally in many institutions.Social isolation is a greatfear for those who do not conform.?The lack of ability to leave and goto another unit makes it possible for the party to control people.Ifyou're isolated there is no way out, you cannot move to another job,neighborhood, or city.

TheeffectoftheGLFoncollegee work was that they went moreoften to the factories to gain knowledge of actual conditions (shiji).]Itwas

-3-stressed that intellectuals should not cut themselves off fromactual conditions.They made factory visits with increased frequency.  A higher proportion ofthe 'college 's teachers went to factories to visit and participate in manuallabor, even math teachers.During the high tide of the movement about lo%

college sstaff was outside in factories participating in labor,ofthetempering themselves in labor and reforming their thinking (laodong duanliangaizao sixiang).This started in l957, but was irregular thereafter.It

Duringthe GLF when teachers andwasmore frequent during1958 and 1960.students went to factories to meet with workers and discuss problems withthem, they went as common laborers, and not as experts.Wages, Promotion (l-1l-80, 2 hrs.)

After l957, Party membership became more important for upwardmobility, especially in being promoted to becoming an official.But from1957-66, things weren't too severly limited to Party members. From 1966to l975, this requirement became more severe.There was no other way tomove upward except to joinithe Party; you can't accumulate capital as incapitalist countries.If you want to be shop director, kezhang, etc., youmust first be a Party member.

The scale of pay for all administrative cadres in China includesall Party officials, all state officials, and cadres within enterprisesall the way down to the shop or section head level.First there is theadministrative cadre (xingzheng ganbu) classification system.It goesfromgrade l (top) to 24. One through l3 are considered high level (gaoji) cadres,14-l7 are middle level, and l8-24 are ordinary(putong).Depending onthe size of the unit and its importance, factory officials at certainlevels will be assigned higher or lower grades.The Plant director ofan Anshan-size company can be grade 6 or 7, while a small plant's directorcan be around 17 or 18.Then also depending on the size of the unit,department headss or shop directorss can get as high as l4, as low as the 20s.

Wages varyby region, and according to the cost of living, muchas do worker wages.

In Peking, as far as he was familiar, the wage levelswent something 1ike this:13） 170¥...16） 112¥，17） 99¥，l8） 87 ¥，19）78¥,20）70¥，21）62¥，22）56¥，23）48¥，24）43¥。

Special Privileges:  There are certain privileges assigned to certaingrades.Grades l to 7 can read internal Partydocumentswhicharedeniedtogrades 8-13, and 8-l3 can read documents which are denied to 19-24. Thegeneral dividing line for special privileges is level l3. The administrativecadre route to higher position was preferred, especially since the intellectualroute through technical expertise was so politically dangerous--they wereconsidered the 'stinking 9th category' later on(chou laojiu).

For housing, grades l8-24 have housing similar to workers, but thisvaries, grade l4-l7 has slightly nicer housing, while l-l3 definitely havelarger, nicer places.  In transportation, grades l-l3 can go lst class ontrains, can take planes.1Lower cadres can only take planes on specialoccassions, while they can't go lst class on trains.

These are the legal sides of special privileges.There are alsothe non-legal.

Since high-level cadres know one another so well becausethey are few, they can call one another up on the phone to have their childrenplaced in good jobs, get university placement.:It is easier to have childrenaccepted into the army, and once inn the army it is6easier toget promotionsto the officer corps.This is all done through guanxi.

The cadres also havebetter local schools for their children, and their children have less house-hold chores to do since their family position is better, so they have more

But during the period 1966-77 when there were notime to devote to study.tests, it was easier for cadres children to get in through guanxi, despite

-4-their qualifications.It is also easier to get desirable marriage partnersfor children, can get better hospital care, can buy things that are rationedfor others, and at larger quantities, like TV sets.But here we have moved

Also, ability to attend certain meetings requiresback into the legal area.that you have a certain grade level.

Cadres of middle level and above don't doconcrete work, they leadothersandgiveorders.They don't do accounting, planning or other adminis-trative work.Thus grades 17and above have somewhat easier jobs.Almostall peopleegradel3andaboveearePartymembers.It is very rare for an indi-vidual in such a high position to beea non-party person.Sometimesamember of the National People's Congress from a democratic party, or someonelike Ba Jin, but very few.Therefore there is very little contradictioninvolved in the rules about reading internal Party reports, because almostall these people are Party members.

At any rate, non-party people cannotread these documents regardless of their grade.

Technical Cadres:

Again, pay depends on locality, also on whetheror not you teach in a university, or work in a bureau or an enterprise.The system ranks technical experts from grade l to l6.1High-school leveltechnicianss usually start out at grade 165andcanadvancetogradel0,college graduate technicians start at l3 and can aadvance to 7.Itisrareto advance to grades l-6, these are usually reserved for pre-49 graduatesor special cases of contributions to the state--not by law but by generalpractice. Grades l4,l5, and l6 are called assistant technicians in enter-prises. Grades l0,ll,l2, and l3 are assigned to technicians in enterprises,and to asistant teachers in universities and institutes.Grades 6,7,8, and9 are usually assistant engineerss(or lecturers in universities)， grades4,5 and 6 are vice-engineers or assistant professors, while gradess 1-4 areengineers or fullL professors.The pay scale in Peking runs as follows:1）360¥，2）300¥，3）240¥，4）200¥，5）170¥，6）146¥，7）126¥，8）105¥，9）90¥，10）79¥，11）70¥，12）62¥，13）55¥，14）49¥，15）44¥，16）38¥.Promotion Opportunities and the Politics of Promotion

Promotions were slower during periods of economic harship.Theystopped altogether with the Cultual Revolution, when the entire system of

After that changes of work without changes of pay gradepromotion halted.

People moved up and down without changes in scale or pay.were commonplace.Then around l973 they started to restore the promotion system, first in theSteel system and then in the Petroleum system.

They raised work titlethen, but still did not raise pay--so only restored half the system.

Earlierthey had abolished titles.

Not untilL the end of 1977, and then again in 1979,did they have a national readjustment where both grades, titles, pay raised.

There were three periods where promotion opportunities were different.First, l949-57, when China's economic progress was very rapid, and there wereSo many opportunities for technical promotions. At this time, universityeducated technicians could be promoted within 3-5 years to assistant engineer.Only 2 kinds of people failed to be promoted.  l) people who had been sickand stopped work for extendeda periods; 2) people with political mistakes, orpeople who did terrible work, or stole things.Both of these exceptions

This meant, depending on where one started in scale, that youwere rare.could get a raise once every year or 2 of at least l grade.At that time,technicians were few and universities still were not producing enough peopletofilltheejobslots.There were regular promotions, and all had opportunities.I says that at that time intellectuals were quite happy, and thought wellofthe government.

Second, 1958-65, where some important changes began.

Raises became-5-rather rare. A larger supply of trained people were being turned out from theuniversities.  In 19600and l963 a small number of people were able to getpromotions and raises, and these were done after appraisals and discussionwithinn small groups.‘The final decisions were made by the Party.jIn1960,and in l963, some factories began to employ the practice of promoting without

Raises title, but not scale and pay.raise.

Third, 1966-76, no one got raises, unless it was secret and due to

They often raised a person's job title, but did not change the wage.guanxi.

TheyAlso during this period a number of cadres were asked to 'stand aside'.lost their powers, were sent to manual labor but kept their titles and wages.In many cases, after a department head or similar leading official steppedaside, then his place was taken by someone who was not called kezhang, but'responsible person' (fuze ren).

There were man y old cadres in this position.About 70-80%5stood aside for at least some stretch during this period.Nobodyexactly took their places in most cases, but a lot of leading authority wasshifted to revolutionary committees and military control committees (jun guan hui).The people who had 'stood aside' had two duties: l) participate in manuallabor, 2) be criticized.

The return of these kinds of people to office and leading work tookplace over a prolonged period, gradually.Some were restored to their postsas6early as l969, others took all the way until 1977, but this still wasa period of continuing, gradual rehabilitation.

It you were not rehabilitatedfairly early, then yoursituation was described ass'left hanging' (guaqilai).Someofthecadresdoing manual labor had their wages lowered, but actuallytheir were just held back.For example, a l20¥ wage might be reduced to 40¥,but the remaining 80 wouid be kept back, set aside and paid to the personwhen his name was eventually restored. Basically speaking. from l966 to1977, there were no wage raises or promotions, just changess in jobs.

Promotion criteria:Before l957, this was based entirelyonability and performance, not on political mistakes or one's thinking.

Unlesstotallyincompetent or sick, or huge political mistakes, then one had a

During 1958-65 still had the old criteria, butchance to be promoted.political showing (biaoxian) entered more into the equation.

For example,if one were criticized during the anti-rightist movement, then your chanceswere slim.BBut also, there was a shrinking number of people being promotedoverall.1Party1 membership still was not clearly a key criteria for promotionamong technicalcadre, but was already becoming so for administrative cadres,especially for promotion to leading positions.

As far as being promoted into administrative positions, technicalcadres had few chances.

I was an engineer, not a party member, and waspromoted to be assistant department head.

But this was rare.1He estimatesthat less than 20% of the leaders were ncn-Party before l966. During thesame period less than l% of plant directors or assistant directors werenon-Party.:But during the Cultural Revolution people with titles had noreal power. It was very confusing.

China has a sspecial characteristic.Its rules are very clearaand precise, but rules are not emphasized.Thisis a result of the rapid reforms and attempted reforms of recent years.

There were several.reactionss by educated cadres to this situation.First, a rather large group lost hope, and decided that allLtheywoulddo was watch movies, pass the time.

They decided it was no use in studyingor working hard.Not only was it useless to do this, but it might alsoget you criticized.  Second, an equally large group）couldn't accept thesituation.They still thought that study and hard work was good, but theydid not dare say so, so they had a contradiction in their minds, andtherefore found it hard to study and work.Third, a smaller group didn'taccept criticisms, kept working hard,and were not afraid of criticismseven though they received them from time to time. .They persisted in working

-6-hard, studying and raising their level of expertise.Experience in Light Industry Enterprises, 196l-65 (5/l7/80, 1.5 hrs.)

In l96l, he transferred to the Light Industry Bureau of PekingMunicipality, and worked for a while in the Technology Department (jishu chu).After half a year, because he didn't like office staff work, he asked tobe transferred to a factory.SSo he was sent to the Chemical Household ProductsPlant in the light industrial system.This was to help them set up a new shop.Later he was transfered to a Furfural Factory(kangquan chang) which madea chemical used in drugs and plastics.They just produced the chemical andsold it to other factories or to export companies.Furfural is made from

He worked here from 1962-65.During that period he was vicecorn cobs.department head of the planning-technology department (this was a smallplant, so the two were combined). Most of what he did was lab research,not management work.

He was transferred back to the Chemical Household Products Plantin early 1965.This was now a 'general plant' (zong chang)， since therehad been a structural reorganization of the bureau, and they were buildingup 'trusts' of several smaller plants under the city bureau.

So more peoplewere needed at this general plant, and he was transferred.

He didn't participate directly in managment work during this period.He didn't have much interest in it and was concentrating on technical work,especially his experiments.  But the general impression he has of this periodwas that they emphasized management systems, rules and regulations, qualitycontrol--the regular and rational systems of the pre-Great Leap period.Enterprise Political Departments

In l965 they established a political department in the plant,under the Party committee.1Previously, most work of the Party was done bythe cadre, propaganda,and security departments. Previously, the cadre andsecurity departments were run by the plant director, while the party committeehad a propaganda dept. (bu) and an organization department (bu).

When the political departments (zhengzhi bu) were established, theytook over all the work of the cadre department, propaganda and securitydepartments.  The biggest effect of this change was that this greatlyinterfered with the plant director's ability to transfer and promote people.In the concrete, this meant that political standards tightened for transferringin new people, promoting people to new positions.The political departmentwould investigate a candidates class background (chushen), politicalattitudessandshowing，etc.This intensified the conflict between people withexpertise and those who the party people would prefer to have, based onnon-professional criteria.

ThismeantthatthechiefE engineer of the plant had less power toassign work to the technical personnel, and that their decisions had to passthrough Party approval. ?This was another step in a gradual increase inParty power in daily management since the beginning of the Great Leap Forward.The personnel for this new political department came not from higher bureau,but from the people who staffed the previous party offices."Four Cleans" Movement

(5/20/80，1 hr.)

The 'four cleans' was one movement which affected the informantvery little.1He says in many others--the anti-rightist and Cultural Revolution,for example--he was a yundong yuan (someone who is habitually made a targetof a campaign, also means athlete).BBut in this one, he had no 'economic'problems, since he didn't handle money or goods, no historical problem, no

-7-problem with bad class background.The '4 cleans' were clean economics,politics, organization, and thought.  Preceding this movement was theSocialist Education Movement, launched after the 6th plenum cf the 8th centralcommittee.But the main emphasis of this movement was the rural areas.Inthecountrysideitwaseeducation aimed at truly bad practices and corruption,because after the lean years of the early60'sthereewasagooddealofcorruption among cadres6 in the villages.

In schools and factories， themovement was more positive--they were just there to propagate the properpolitical line:

uphold the socialist line, the 3 red flags, etc.

Butthere was some struggle of bad elements, but not as much as in the countryside.

The '4 cleans'evolved, but after January 1965 it became aimed atrectifying people in power taking the capitalist road.The movement did notaffect management like the CR, they held meetings after work hours， anddid not interfere with management systems.Aworkteam(gongzuo zu)(cameto their plant.

They wereecadress from other units, but from where was

The work groups that came was two people at first,considered a secret.and later grew to 3.It changed in the midst of the movement.This workteam did not come to take over the Party Committee's power (like the PLAteams did during the CR), but to work along with it.Their activities

1) theywere aimed at investigating cadres.

They did this in two ways:established a work group to investigate every leading cadre in the plant,

They looked at their history, and their files.2）Theyall party members.asked people to give reports and inform on others--"what kinds of bad thingshas this person done that reflect the capitalist road?"

They held mass meetings of all the plant employees to examine people

They asked them to talk about their past, and interrogatedunder suspicion.them.

After the masses listened, each group met, and made a study report,and gave their opinions about that person.Theyhad a saying at the time"cadres come dowmstairs" (ganbu xialou). It wasequivalent to passing this

If after examiningone'scase,theeleading cadre was invitedexamination.to'come downstairs' and be with the masses, then he was OK. (This term mayrefer in part to the construction of many restaurants in China, where theupstairs rooms are for officials6 and foreigners, while the downstairsare for the average citizen--Aw).

The idea of the movement was to have themasses examine each leadinggcadreinthe Partyandtodecide whether or nothe deserved to "be with the masses" or not.

This was the earliest stage of the movement， and it concentrated onthe leading Partycadres.But later, according to the 23 points, they alsowent after problems among the masses.They had a secret report box where peoplecould inform on fellow workers anonymously--for stealing, other anti-socialbehavior.One management cadre(non-party)and 2 workersSwere the maintargetsof this part ofthemovement.The workers were both accused of stealing plant

The cadre was accused of corruption, because he had bought extraproperty.meal tickets for use in the canteen.This was against the rule because theywere supposed to be rationed and money not used.

Atthemeetings6wheretheywereexaminedit wasbesttoadmitguiltguickly and be done with it, because if they doubted you despite protests ofinnocence, things could get difficult.They didn't use wallposters, they justheld meetings during this movement.

The movement did not affect a lot ofpeople personally.

The only ones in this plant of 6oo were these 3.HHis plantwas a peaceful one.But he heard that in other plants things were a lot

They did investigate people's class backgrounds, come to think ofrougher.

But if you had no suspicions about yourit--theydiscussed this at meetings.

During this stage of the movement theybehavior, tthen there was no problem.found out that on ef thestaff members who had claimed staff (zhiyuan)background, had actually owned a private enterprise before l956, and was

-8-receiving interest, but he didn't admit it.Sohewaskickedoutofhisunion membership, because capitalists can't belong to the union.They changedthe chushen in his file, but there was no criticism or other punishment. Thiswass in the furfural factory, before heewastransferredtotheChemicalHouseholdArticles Plant (huaxue riyong pin chang).CulturalRevolution

(1/22/80, 1.5 hrs.)

From the end of June, l966, until August, there were work teams inhis factory.

There were 20 members in the team.

They were not Peking prople,

Since the Peking Municipal Party Committee hadalreadythey came from Henan.been discredited, they moved people in from outside, and they swallowed up theoriginal Party committee， formed a work group (zu).When they came to the plantthey began to mobilize the massess in meetings, and began looking up and doinginvestigation in people's dossiers. They criticized one assistant plant directorand one vice-secretary of the party committee.These people promptly 'stoodaside',probably because they were vulnerable to criticism as followers of 'thosein power', since they had done most of the work over the past few years. Theassistant director was an engineer.The work team had 3 jobs--to criticizethose in power, based on their investigations, to paste up wallposters, andto investigate individuals by talking to workers and by looking at files(dangan) .

But when Liu Shaoqi was first criticizedat the end of August l966,he was in trouble for this work team policy.sSo the work team just dis-appeared from the unit.Then things changed.: The Red Guard movement emergedfrom among the '5 good elements' among the workers, and they came out tosmash the four olas'--thought, culture, customs, habits.

They went after the'5 black categories'--they criticized and struggled them, searched their

About 4 or 5 people in his plant were actually struggled then,homes, etc.which meant that they were put on a platform, and whipped with a belt during

Morethan 40 people werea public interrogation.

None were hurt very badly.sent to their home villages over the next few months.This was decided largelyby looking at people's dossiers.At this time, even though the Party committeeexisted in name, it was no more.There still were party members in power,however, and they were helping these red guard organizations, although thiswasnotapparent.

At that time, I was the vice-head of the research department.Ayoung technician and a young worker in the research department wrote awallposter criticizing him for bourgeois thinking, and revisionism.  At thattime he went to work at manual labor.

Most of the leading cadres at that timewere doing so, and many of the staff.They asked him to volunteer for this,but of course he had no`choice but to volunteer.The work of the researchdepartment stopped at this time.

The production situation didn't change much, even though many of thestaff were doing full-time labor.  This is because: l)) work efficiency of thestaff was low anyway, there were too many people--overstaffed;  2) the poiiticalpressure at that time was so intense that workers did not dare be lax at work.They didn't want to be accused: "you worked for Liu's bonuses, but now thatthere's no bonus, you don't work--you're a revisionist!" It was just toodangerous.  1November and December l966 were relatively stable times within thefactory, even thoughn there were a lot of red guard activities in the streets.

After the events of January l967 in Shanghai, the situation changed.There were seizures of power throughout the country.

The red guard movementwas declared misled.Now everyone was forming'fighting groups' (zhan dou dui)for the purpose of seizing power.They began with a small number of factions,then there were efforts to unite and seize power because of the Party center's

-9-to do so.  But usually the groups coalesced into two large groups in conflict.There were no armed conflicts among the two factions in I's factory, althoughthere were in others.

The factionsinvaded the plant director's office, and stole the chop（tuzhang)）of office.This was their method of seizing power. They also foughtover the chop once it had been seized.At that time, production was not too

The rebel groups did not fight all day, and only about l0%badly disrupted.were missing at any one time.

Peking was not disrupted as much as otherplaces during January to June l967--places like Anhui, Shanghai (for a shortwhile)， Sichuan, Hebei (particularly Baoding), Yunnan, Guizhou, and Wuhan.(1/24/80,  2 hrs.)

Inhisplantasmallnumbeeofworkerslefttheplantforeitherfactional fights or for rests.About l0-l5% of the plant members didthissort of thing.At that time a small number of cadres who did not get sentdown for labor continued to work--in the finance department, the planningdepartment, the deparment heads stayed on the job.Supply procurers also

During 1965 three 1leading cadres--2 vice-directors,stayed on the job.and the first Party secretary--had gone to the Party1 school and been

This had been a temporaryassigned to other organizational matters in Peking.

When they finally returned at the end of l966, and saw whattransfer.was going on, they were unwilling to take up 1responsibiiities.

They saw thatthe people who had done the best management work were being attacked, so theydecided not to work.They did three things: l) labor, 2) study, 3)rest athome.sSo they really didn't stand aside, they just didn't work.

The substituteParty secretary had already stood aside, and was engaged in manual labor.Theplant director was also doing manual labor and political study. and had stoodaside.These two didn't have any real practical knowledge of production anyway.so the plant didn't suffer too badly from their absence.Three formerdepartment heads were running things.

At that time it wasn't too bad to work in the shops because there wasmuch free time at work, because coordination between factories was disruptedand it threw off their production schedule, so many groups

could do nothingbut sit in the plant and wait.Often supplies didn't show up, or the watersupply was cut off, or electricity was cut off.SSo they just sat and rested.Other times, transport was blocked, so their products piled up and they hadno place to put things， so again they had to stop production.This situationoccurred with the greatest frequency in the first half of l967， but thingswere never completely restored thereafter, and had these kinds of briefdisruptions up until l973 or so.When they stopped work, sometimes theychatted, sometimes they rested, talked, sometimes did political study.Fate of the Original LeadingCadres

In the first half of l967, the 6 top leading cadres were in thefollowing situations:  l) Plant director--he didn't do much work anyway:and had no real talent.  So he just read newspapers, walked around and askedin the shops how things were going.

The largest faction (bao huang pai,or conservatives)supported him, while the smaller one (zaofan pai,Yyoungerworkers) opposed him.

So he kept 'on the job'.1But since he didn't domuch real work before, it was hard to criticize him for revisionist practices.2）First Party Secretaryr-this was the man who was substituting for the onetransferred out temporarily in l965-66.

He saw thee conflict between the factionsand decided not to come to work in his office.

He put on work clothes and mixedwith the workers in the shops, wandering about and tryingI to blend in.

Hehad no fixed work post.3）Second Party Secretary--this was a substitutesecretary also.He had 'stood aside', aand had been criticized at a mass

But he received no beatings, this was still reserved only formeeting.

-10-'monsters and demons' (niugui sheshen).He was sent down to work in the shops,and had a fixed work post.His job was to take lead-tin alloy plates out ofa bin and cart them over to a machine which stamped out toothpaste tubes.4) Assistant Director (chief Engineer)--he was criticized and had a lot ofability, so was ciiticized severely. Although he had fairly high technicalability, he was sent to do the simplest labor possible in order to remold histhinking. In fact, he was criticized precisely because he was so talentedand had worked so hard.He was given a job chipping cement off of usedbricks from an old building being demolished.5) and 6) had been transferredout of the plant in l965 to do other work in the Peking bureau, and when theyreturned in l966, and saw what was going on they, like the first Party secretary,decided to stay away from the offices and do manual labor.They floated aroundthe plant in work clothes, helping out and talking, largely because they hadnothing to do.

So only 2 or 3 leading cadres in the plant were criticized and madeto 'step aside'. The others did not 'step aside', they were just doing manuallabor.There is a difference.Kao biar zzhan means that you have been criticizedand officially removed from all posts. Most people who did good work and alot of work earlier were certainly criticized and made to step aside.Formation of the RevolutionaryCommittee

About March or April l967, the PLA representatives came to theplant.They were called 'Mao Tse-tung Though propaganda teams'. Althoughthey were called a 'propaganda team' they were really there to seize power,and they had considerable authority.  About 7 PLA soldiers came and formedagroup）(zu).First they went around and chatted, and to find out aboutthe plant's situation.There objectives;  l) to decide who were the realrebels, and who should seize power, 2) to decide among those who had stoodaside, who were really capitalist roaders and who were not, and 3) to findout about the production situation from those cadres who were still runningthings.

Then the PLA went around spreading propaganda that not all cadreswere bad, only'those in power'.

Those who were judged to be without problemswere told to 'stand up' (zhanqilai). At least this was the slogan. It neverreally happened. During this period, for about 8 months to the end of l967,there was a lot of study. There was also a movement to 'repudiate self,criticize revisionism' (dousi pixiu).TThey also had a campaign where theycriticized unnamed people who did not 'give prominenece to politics' (tuchuzhengzhi).

During thiss entire period, from late 1966 to the end of 1967， therewere no formal Party committee activities.FPapers said 'the party is paralyzed'(dangwei yijing tanhuan). But this seems strange--there still must have beensome behind the scenes power because there were many militia guns under partycare, and many secret materials, but these were protected throughout the move-

The Party Committee was not formally rebuilt until l97l-72 or so, possiblyment.after the death of Lin Biao, although I can't remember. In February or Marchl968, the Revolutionary Committee was finally established. The army ledpreparatory meetings leading up to its formation, and seemed to control theentire process of selection, as well as the RC itself, after it was established.There were no real electionsS of members, but 'democratic consultation' (minzhuxieshang). It wasn't reallydemocratic.

Before this, the army had organized a 'great alliance committee' inwhich the factional leaders participated reluctantly.

They prepared to'seize power', but they were not really seizing power.1Everyone knew it wasimpossible to oppose the army, because all they had to do was call on the phoneand scores of army men would arrive.

-11-

This 'alliance committee', composed of the army people and represen-tatives of mass organizations who were selected by the army, got together to

They had discussions in each shop andform the Revolutionary Committee.

The resulting RC had 1l members.Thetopfactionalleadersgroup about this.in the plant had hoped to become appointed as members, but they were disappointed,and became very angry. because not one was chosen from the 'great alliancecommittee'.But there was nothing they could do.

They used the"triple combination'principle in forming the RC--workers:revolutionary cadres, and PLA.?The members: the former plant director,who never did any work before and was never criticized, two. department heads,one shop director, 3 or 4 military representatives, and several old andexperienced workers.:In all, almost every member of the RC was a PartyI member.The old plant director, most of the experienced workers, cadres, and ofcourse the PLA were allL party members.People generally didn't like theRC. The intellectuals didn't like it because they didn't think it couldmanage production well.The former factional activists were even moredissatisfied because they were not represented--this was still the same oldParty in power.(l/26/80, 2 hrs.)

Informant does not know how the RC ran production, and how they met,etc., because he did not participate.After the RC was established, theold plant director was on the RC, the old first party secretary was workingin the shop, the second party secretary had 'stood aside' and wa's working inthe shops, the assistant director (engineer) also stood aside, and was doingmanual labor, and the other 2 assistant directors were still doing manuallabor.

Among the 15 department and vice department heads, only 3 or 4 remainedat their original posts.The rest did manual labor in the shops.

They did notformally'step aside'， but it was the equivalent.Thedifferencewasthat theywere not criticized at meetings, or formally forced to step）aside.They justdid so quietly in order to prevent criticisn--but there was no choice.Theones who remained in their positions were those who handled important departments--planning, finance, supply, and administrative departments.

But at that timepeople did not want to continue to do leadership work.TThings were in suchdisorder that it was very hard to do a good job,and there was lots of overtime,and it was dangerous to exercise power at that time.They had no clear idea ofwhat constituted mistaken leadership but they were inn constant fear of makinga mistake. Their behavior, as a result, was to be careful (xiaoxin) on the onehand, while trying to maintain the status6 quo (weichi xianzhuang))ontheother.They wereafraidtobeon the political right.TThey. thought "better left thanright" (ningzuo wuyou--宁左物右）：For example, they were afraid to giveout bonuses, because that appeared rightist.

The people who took the places of the rest of the old department headsand their assistants were usually old workers who had since become staffworkers in departments, or Party members working as staff members.Thesenewleading cadres of course didn't have the same qualifications, but it didn'tmatter anyway because things weren't being run properly otherwise, and manage-ment still wasn't on track.

"On track" means thatofthe"8 technical and economicstandards", only 2 were being grasped at that time--output(chan liang), andoutput value (chan zhi).The other 6 aspects (profit， quality， etc.)，wereconsidered revisionist and not handled as a result.This is still a problemwith China today.

So the practical effect of cadre timidity was that theother 6 regulations were not handled well.I thinks that the following werethe '8 standards':l) output, 2） output value, 3) materials consumption, 4) profit,5) costs, 6) labor productivity, 7) equipment utilization rate (shebei wanhao lu),

-12-8) Utilization rate of liquid capital.They tended to ignore the last 6standards, because to mind them too closely was to risk criticism as a revisionist.Only output was safe.Enterprise Reorganization

For a while after the establishment of the revolutionary committee, theyimplemented a PLA-inspired form of organization, to replace the former depart-mental system of staff organization.They put it into effect after the9th Party Congress in April 1969--around September.The departments were

the political group,reorganized and consolidated into 3 groups (zu):theproductiongroup, and the logistics(houqin) group. 'Logistics' meantadministration of livelihood matters, a combination of former general affairsand administration departments.This conception came from the organizationof the army, which was based on a division's organization into a politicaldepartment,

anaadvisor's department (canmou), and a logistics department.Also, there was a renaming of the lower level units, a 'militarization' oforganization.Shops were renamed 'companies' (lian), sections were named'platoons' (pai), and production-groups were called 'squads' (ban).

In l972, the PLA representatives were withdrawn from the plant, and themilitary names were dropped.

They returned to the system of departmental

The political groupsorganization gradually.

(zu)

were changed backto the old political departments (bu) of pre-CR times (l965).These politicaldepartments were still there when I left in l979. Political groups establishedand directed special investigation groups (zhuan an zu) to investigate thecases of people who had 'stood aside' and those attacked during the'cleaning of the class ranks' campaign.

There were not many changes rightafter the CR in shops organization, and the shop directors themselves tendedto do manual labor less often because they became more vital to productionwith the abolition of departments.This was .also true for asst. shopdirectorsandbranchPartysecretaries.'Cleaning of the Class Ranks' Campaign

In May l968, after the establishment of the RC, they began a movementcalled 'cleaning of the class ranks'. The PLA controlled this movement.Theslogan ofi:the movement was to remove class enemies from the ranks of the people.This means the following people, who had bad class status (chengfen).Al1of the'nine bad categories'were included as: targets except the intelectuals,'the stinking ninth category'.?This usuallyYmeant people who longagohad beenlabelled as bed elements in the l950s.These people were already wellknow in their units.

But the essence of the movement was to drag out peoplewho had already been given labels in their dossiers and thrown intocowsheds.It was also the object to investigate people about whom therewere suspicions.These people under suspicion were always those who belongedtothe 8 categories of badclass status：（chengfen）.They investigated theircases, and then confronted these people in large criticism meetings, forcedthem to confess, then threw them into a"cowpen",and not allow them to come out.These were people who had politically questionable backgrounds, but who hadnever beenLgiven labels.

This was a way of 'rooting out hidden(class enemies'

Special investigation groups (zhuan'an zu) were set upfor all casesin doubt, and they were even set up to investigate people further who alreadyhad been labelled in the l950s.The people who participated were predomi-nantly young workers of good political standing, and were chosen by the PLArepresentatives.  lPeople of bad class status who had been sent to their homevillages as punishment earlier in the Cultural Revolution were dragged backto their factories to be criticized again in this part of the movement.

An example:

there was another engineer in the plant who had graduated

-13-from university before liberation.  At that time, after graduation, he couldnotfindwork.SohewenttoTaiwan to look for work, and found it, workingfor 2 months.But he was dissatisfied, and returned to Peking shortly beforethe liberation of Peking.At that time Taiwan was not a KMT base.Thispart of this man's6 past was not a secret.

He had already written it downin his personal history he wrote for the CCP shortly after liberation, andit was in his file.Everybody knew this in the plant, at least among hisfriends.During this campaign, they dragged him into the cowshed and he

They established a special investigation 9group ofcould not return home.6 people, many of whom worked in the same group--some technicians of lowerstatus, some young workers, and the PLA sent someone from among their midstto be chairman of the group.

Among these 6 people, two were Party members.This investigation group worked very hard.

They had a three shift

This was a small room in an officesystem to guard this man in his'cowpen'.building on the ground floor.He was in isolation, no one else was there, sincehe might have been a spy.When the man went to theebathroom，to eat，healways had to be accompanied by someone.If hegot sick and went to thehospital, they would still go with him.

Duringthis period, about once every2 weeks， they dragged him out to the shop floor to criticize him.

He 'did theairplane',，was forced to confess his crimes, etc.He refused to confessto crimes, of course, because he had not gone to Taiwan to consort with

But ofcoursethese youngthe KMT's spies, he just tole the truth.workers and technicians didn't know any history.

They didn't know there wassuch a thing as people looking for their own jobs, and that the KMT did not

Sofrom Mayto December of that year he stayed in hisalways occupy Taiwan.cell, since he would not confess.The investigation group went to his house,searched his clothes, etc.They also picked things up)for him.  He washedhis owm clothes--but he was usually pretty filthly and dissheveled.

But they gave him 15¥

They didn't give him wages for 3-4 months.per month temporarily in order for him to eat:

Theeinvestigationgroupcontinued to take him1tothe shopssto criticize him,and continued to study

Why?

Generally, they haveand investigate his case.

I is not too sure.

This meansinvestigation both inside and out of a unit (neicha, waidiao).reading one's personal file and questioning coworkers about his activities.Second, they go outside to investigate.People were sent to his hometown inFujian to question people, ask the local Party committee about his family

They would seek out peopel that the suspectbackground, his past behavior.said could verify his story (zhengming ren).

Informant knows about this method because a friend of his in anotherwork unit had named him as a guarantor to verify his story. So someone cameto his workplace to question him about his friend.The person wrote downhis responses and had him sign the transcript afterwards.

This method tooka lot of time, and cost a lot of money, and employed a lot of people. Thehotels were full of these investigators at this time.

After all this, they couldn't find out any new things about thisengineer.So after the beginning of l969, they still had nothing to show,and they began to loosentheir control, their guard over him, but still

They wouldn't let him go because the PLA repre-didn't let himi go home.sentatives and the investigation group were embarrassed.1After all thewallposters, all the criticism and charges, they were just embarrassed--this is I's guess as to their reasons.

Theydidn't want toadmit that the

They were unable to 'back down in good grace'movement was unreasonable.(xiabuliao tai).Despite the fact that the movement had built'up a certainmomentum1(sheng shi)）of its own, the group gradually loosened control overthe man.

-14-

As preparations for the 9th Party Congress of l969 neared, this man,along with the others, were gradually released.!This was around February. Sonot until the top leadership ordered it could these people be released, becausethe people within the plant were not willing to back down, it would be tooembarrassing.  1Finally they backed down when a Central Committee documentordered it.A total of 20-30 people in his plant had received this kindof treatment, where they were put in total isolation except for people inthe investigation group.

If the family came, they could only visit withthe investigators present.

In the end, according to the model experience of 6 factories and2 schools in the Peking area whose PLA representatives(military controlcommissions, jun guan hui), they settled the case by writing out a documentto put in the person's file.  In his engineer friends case, they hadn't foundanything, but their conclusion was "this man's counter-revolutionary spyactivities in Taiwan have to this day not been uncovered", meaning thatlater he was in danger of being dragged out again.Gradually, back wageswere paid to these people.These people often returned.ito their previouswork.  But this was a gradual process, because often there was a periodofmanuallabor first.But these things often dragged out.Even thoughmost cases had been cleared up and people returned to their 1jobs, somepeople's cases were left hanging for as much as 4-5 years.

They were'left hanging'(guaqilai).Downward Transfer of Cadres (xiafang ganbu)

In the month before the 9th Party Congress, they had two movements:rectify the party(zheng dang)， and simplification of administration anddowmwardtransferofcadres6(qingjian jigou, xiafang ganbu).They continuedthe simplification and reorganization of administrative structures alongPLA lines.They began to send all cadres--Party and non-Party. to domanual labor, some in May7schools.Theyrreorganization and simplificationof administration has been discussed before.

They renamed the differentlevels of organization according to a military model, and also divided up thedepartments and other staff sections into three, which combinedthe following former department functions:  The political work group (zhenggong zu) did the work of the former personnel department, propaganda department,and security(department.The production group (shengchan zu) did the workof the former labor department, planningg and finance department, and technicaldepartment.The logistics (houqin)(groupodid the work of the administrativedepartment, and had the union's former functions.During this period one-half to two-thirds of the cadres were sent to do manual labor.TThosecadreswho worked in factories were sent to shops, but some were sent to May 7cadre schools.Those from Ministries, Bureaus, Schools, etc. mostly wenttoMay7cadreschools.(2/5/80, 1.5 hrs.)

After the 9th Party Congress, in April 1969, they began to send largenumbers of cadres dowm for manual labor.jIn I's plant, this was more thanwere sent down during the CR, since at that time it was only the 'stinkingintellectuals'((chou lao jiu) who were sent dowm.1During 1968, up untilMay or·June, production was not very good. It didn't stop, but really suffered.But after the 'cleaning of the class ranks' campaign, where there was a verystrict political atmosphere, political pressures on employees were very high.They were putting labels on people and it was dangerous not tolisten to theorders of the PLA leadership to produce and work hard. SSo they reliedonpolitical appeals and political pressure to stimulate workers, since there wereno bonuses at this time.So this was the way that production was restored.

-15-They also used the appeal of 'preparing for war', since there was a border

So if you sabotaged production youconflict with the USSR in l969, also.could be accused of aiding the enemy.

Who was sent dowm for labor?

Revolutionary Committee cadres did not

Some of the cadres in the political work group）(zheng gong zu） were sent,go.and also cadres from other groups.

Who decided who went?

Theymadeeupa listof all cadres.

Then,depending on the jobs they did (more political cadreswere sent down than logistics cadres), and depending on whether or not theyhad already been down for a stint of labor, they chose those who were to go.About 20% of the cadres had already done manual labor during 1966-68.Somehad returned to work, but few.sSo duringg the 'xia fang' of cadres in 1969-70,they sent down about one half to two thirds of the remaining cadres. So ifthere were 100 cadres in September 1966, 20 would have been sent to the shopsduring 66-68.This would leave 80 cadres.Then during 1969, they sendanother 40 to the shops, leaving 40 to work in the 3 leading groups describedbefore.

But there were degrees of being 'sent down', depending on the situationand the period.

Only 2 high level cadres formallyY'stood aside'--the twodescribed previously who were thrown into tthe cowshed during the cleaning ofthe class; ranks campaign.

About2o%wereinthesameboatastheinformart--not really struggled.against, not put in a cowshed, no real punishment.Butthey didn't have model backgrounds, were intellectuals, so were driven by thepolitical situation to do manual labor.1Political pressures intimidated them.One or two cadres were forced to go to their native villages by Red Guardsearlier because they had KMT connections, etc.They were called 'bad elements'(about 30 workers were sent down during the same period, also).About lo cadreswere placed in a cowshed during the cleaning of the class ranks, awaitinginvestigation by a special investigation group.

Those with serious problemscouldn'tleaveetheir cells.But those with less serious problems did laborduring the day and stayed in their cells at night (also about lo workerswere involved in the same treatment).

The 40or sosentdownduringthe'xiafang' of cadres in l969 were not people accused of having problems,but theytended to be people with less than favorable class backgrounds--overseasS ties, capitalist parents, non-proletarian or non-peasant backgrounds.The criteria, however, was not Party membership, chushen was more important.If you were a member of the '5 red categories', tthen you were unlikelytobe sent down then.It depended on ability, chushen,'public opinion'eexpressedin "struggle, criticism, transformation" meetings.When these cadres weresent to fixed units for manual labor--all units, canteen, shops, warehouse--it was full-time with no time limit given.It was considered permanent.Their former departments were being abolished with the simplification of

Of course, theyadministration.

So this was to beeapermanenttransfer.all kept their original grades and salaries.

So this was a 3-fold movement.

They had criticisms of Liu Shaoqiand a small number of cadres in the unit who hadgone thecapitalist road.At this point people were not actually present when being criticized--notlike duringI the CR.

But there were a lot of criticisms of"stinking intellectuals"in the abstract, so political pressure was intensified, even if criticism wasnotdirectedatindividuals.

Three parts--l) the simplification of administra-tion and the abolition of departments, reorganization into'groups'.22) thexiafang of cadres described above, and 3) Party rectification--this includedthe criticisms and the xiafang, and included steps described below.Party Rectification and Rebuilding

After the 9th congress, the Military Control Commission (jun guan hui)appointed a Party Rectification Study Group (zheng dang xuexi xiaozu).

-16-This group organized meetings, invited selected mass representatives (thosewith good class backgrounds), and examined each former Party member one by one,examined their past actions, whether or not they had. followed Liu Shaoqi,whether or not they had revisionist thoughts, etc. If Party members hadoverseas connections, or poor class backgrounds, then they would have alonger series of discussions on the person.But almost all Party members

Afterwere restored to active membership in Party life (zuzhi shenghuo).this they were considered recitified Party members.By 1970 they had, throughthis gradual process, established a temporary Party branch committee in variousshops (linshi dang zhibu).)Not until after Lin Biao died did they restorethe Party Committee for the plant.The "Anti May l6th Elements Movement"

(5/13/80, 1.5 hrs.)

This movement took place after the cleaning of the class rankscampaign, and was run by the Military Control Committee.There was evidence,or at least a claim was made that the 'May l6 Group', which had gotten intotrouble in mid-l967, had a nation-wide secret organization which rebelsjoined.Lin Biao declared this group counter-revolutionary and called fora movement to smash the 'secret members' of this group (qingcha wu yao liufenzu). So they began to investigate people who they suspected of belonging.But did every unit have members of this group?

Unlikely, because therewere so many units, and many small ones, unimportant ones.SSo how did theydecide someone was one of these elements?  Basically, since this was an ultra-leftist group, they determined whether you were not a secret follower byany past behavior which indicated extreme radicalism on your part--especiallyduring the period of the seizure of power.This was especially the case forthose who had challenged security departments, public security bureaus,the people's militia, and the PLA.

This was in l970-7l, after the establishment of the RevolutionaryCommittee, but before the re-establishment of the Party Committee. Themovement had not concluded by the time Lin Biao was killed, so it was droppedafterthat.They began with a big mass meeting，andatried to get peopleto reveal the past behavior of former activists6 during the CR.

They explainedwhat the May l6 organization was.This was the "mobilizational meeting"(dongyuan dahui)， held to get things moving.1In reality, however, thiswas not mobilization but giving orders (xia mingling)--but they stillused the term mobilization.This was a common manner of speech for leaders.

When they uncovered a suspect, they threw them into a niupeng, aroom set aside for keepingthese people.

They could not leave, were put intoa study group "xuexi ban".TheyYwereforcedtostudyand writeconfessions.This process took place' over the year from Spring 1970-Summer l97l.Butduring the entire period only about 44 people were put into the cowpens,and most were released after the fall of l97l.Of course, everyone confessed,in accord with the common principle: "tanbai congkuan, kangju congyan",which means, basically, leniency to those who are honest about their crimes,'and harsh treatment tothose who)refuse.After a period, all of these peoplereturned to their work after Lin Biao died.

The movement was not too severe in his plant. But in others they puta lot of people away, and went after rebels who had made their: way onto the RCduring the CR.But in his plant no former rebels made it into the RevolutionaryCommittee, so none were put away..Of the four people targeted in his plant,3 were members of one faction, one a member of the opposing one.They hadall been factional leaders during the CR.  So nobody on the RevolutionaryCommittee was touched.His general impression of the results of this movementis that it succeeded in getting rid of most factional leaders on RevolutionaryCommittees and in leading positions.AAfter this, thee 'mass representatives'

-17-ceased to be the factional leaders, and began to be people like labor models,union representatives, youth league leaders, women's committee representatives,etc.But by this time there was no actual power being exercised by the RC, theParty or at least a faction within it controlled all decisions. But theserepresentatives of the masses were placed on revolutionary committees like'filling in the blanks'(zhen kong).They had formula for filling out theRC membership0 and the leaders chose these members, there were no elections.These people were just chosen incidentally, not as a result of leadershipor election.

You could callthese peoplee'trusted followers' (qin xin),or 'lackeys' (zhaoya).They came to approve totally of all policies, andliked the gang of 4, and naturally did not challenge authority.SSo therevolutionarycommittee was gradually turned into a committee filled withthese kinds of 'lackeys'.They didn't need people with the ability to rebel,they needed 'docile tools' (xunfu gongju). Lin Biao used them, but hedid not like the former rebels.May 7 Cadre Schools (2/7/80, 2 hrs.)

Factories and industrial bureaux did not set up May 7cadre schools.Large universities, public health departments, commercial departments andorgans of government, like ministries, did set them up.They were establishedon the outskirts of cities, but national ministries could usually establishthem far away.A small number were established during the CR, but most wereestablished during l969 during the 'xiafang' of cadres for manual labor.No cadres from his plant went to May 7 schools for labor, they all wentthe the shops in enterprises.Military Control Committees

Shortly after the seizure of power in Shanghai, military teams cameto his plant.But at thistime theywerecalled Military PropagandaTeams,and they tried to unite the various factions. In fact they held power from themoment they entered the factory.

Around March 1968, they changed the nameto the Military Control Commission (jundui guanzhi weiyuanhui--perhaps inthis context, 'Committee' is a better translation), and shortly thereafterformed the revolutionary committee.Who were these people?

They were middleand lower level officers.They came from the Logistics Departmen- of the PLAheadquarters, but he doesn't know from what region.There were less thanl0 officers in all. After they first came, they got to know people and theirpolitical stands, class backgrounds, who had been attacked, who had stood

After they got to know the situation, theyaside, who were the activists.began to go to work.

After the establishment of the RC, some of these officers were membersof. the RC, one was a vice-head.AAfterwards the Military Control Committee putall their efforts into organizing the 'cleaning of the class ranks'(campaign.This was from May to December 1968 or thereabouts. Afterwards in 1969, theyran the campaign to rectify the party, simplify administration, and sendcadres dowm for manual labor.Near the end of l97l, Party Committee wasre-established, aand was under the controlof the MilitaryControl Committeeuntil the officers left in late l972.

They re-established the Party branches in varoius shops in l97o andled them themselves until they established the all-plant Party committee inlate l97l.  As the Party committee was re-established, the Party committeetook over leadership of the branches, re-established control over personalfiles and other secret materials.Manyformer leading Partycadres whohad been criticized and had done labor were transferred to other plants toresume leading positions there.SomanynewPartycadres movedintotheplant at that time.

-18-Production in early l970's

Not until l973 or so did production really revive.1By'really'he means all sides of production--quantity, output, quality, waste,cost efficiency.After 1966 straight up to l972-73 they didn't rea1ly have goodproduction, even when they fulfilled output targets.I says that quality wasbad for allL products during this period, since regulations were not being adheredto.Bicycles bought during this period were terrible compared to before l965.In l973 they reorganized the factory structures, did away with the CulturalRevolution '3 group system' (san zu zhi)--political work, production, logistics.They re-established the old staff departments.TThey also gradually returnedthe 'sent down' administrative and technical cadres to staff the reviveddepartments and laboratories.By l973 this process was largely completed.Informant's Personal Experience at Work, l966-73

Before the Cultural Revolution, he had headed the research lab ofthe plant and was an engineer.1In late l966 he went to do manual laborin a number of different shops， and also went to other factories withinthe Peking Light Industrial System for a while.He was also sent for shortperiods on a rotating basis to afforestation projects in the hills aroundPeking.He also did some labor digging bomb shelters during the l970war preparations period.He digged, helpO make bricks.

Butformostofthisperiod he worked in the chemical products shop--surfactins were the product,used in the' making of toothpastee and cosmetics.

The main job in the shopwasthe installation and maintenance of equipment. During the entire periodhe was asked to help with more complicated things; calculations, drawingsand plans, He was asked by the shop director to help for a while, and workedfor short periods in the shop office at a desk.He also did arc welding,torch cutting, installed instrumentation and did electrical wiring. He alsotranslated English materials into Chinese--materials related to chemicalproducts in the plant library.:1969 and 1970 were the years where he didthe most manual labor in the factory.

In March l972 he returned to office work in the 'production groupstaff office.There he worked on scientific information and research.Butat this time he was not formally restored to the title'engineer'.They justtold him to return to office to work.He read Russian and English journals,especiallyreading patent information to keep up with the latest innovations.By this timethee 'groups' in this administrative system had become fairlylarge, since they had gradually increased in size after cadres returned fromthe shop floor.

They1 divided up labor, with 2 or 3 responsible for certainjobs, so it waslike having departmentss without formally calling them that.Around30staff members worked in the production groupOwhenhewasthere,and it was increasing all the time.1In the summer of l973, they were establishingsome new industrial research institutes in Peking, and were emphasizingscientificresearch.So he was sent to a household chemicals research institutein the industrial system of Peking city. It was small, really a 'group'.But he was still in close contact with the various small plants in the samelight industrial system, of which this small research institute was an integralpart.Industrial Administration after l97l

They started to re-establish staff departments out of the productiongroup in his plant at the end of l972. They first re-established the planning,finance departments, and later established the labor department and others.This process stretched out into l973.

Had he ever heard of the slogan 'reorganize leading groups' (zhengdunlingdao banzi)?  Yes, this was probably around l973, but the 'soft, lazy. and

-19-disunited' (lan, ruan, san) slogan used by Deng Xiao-ping to describeadministrative leadership at the time (which the informant brings upspontaneously at this point) was not until l975( yes, he repeats thatheissureofthisdate).Informant heard of this effort not through news-papers, but in meetings in his unit.The slogans were circulated in internalParty documents which he was not allowed to read.

Was Deng's characterization of leading administrators correct?

Why? Because the ones who were criticized most heavily duringAbsolutely.the cultural revolution, and removed, were those that worked the hardest.So those that were left in leading positions were the less energetic andactive, and those who were removed from leading positions were often themost energetic and daring administrators.

The ones that were left didn'treally dare to lead.  Also a lot of the new leaders were not very capable.Add to this the fact that the leaders weren't united, and that they quarreledover the best methods, and leadership was really ineffective.(3/1/80, 3 hrs.)

Why were so many people in the unit leadership 'soft, lazy, anddisunited' during l973-75, as Deng's characterization suggests?Therewere2 reasons.1First, leaders often didn't have that much power. Second,leaders were afraid to exercise that power they did have.This was largelybecause they had been criticized during the CR, but also because workershad gotten into the habit of ignoring orders.Also, the Mao quotation wason everyone's mind in the leadership--"rhere will not be only one CulturalRevolution, but will be several; one is needed perhaps once every 5 years".Soeveryone was being quite careful not to do things that could be inter-preted as capitalist road.

Workers not listening to orders? What does this mean concretely?At that time one's work level had no connection with wages.Whetheror notone worked hard or listened to orders, the result was the same for ones

In one case, a worker was asked by his productionincome.A mile example:group leader and by the shop secretary to switch toanothermachinethenext week, because there was no more work fcr his machine to perform.But the worker refused the switch, saying he couldn't operate the other machine,well knowing that if he stayed on the first machine he would get to rest.People would also refuse transfers to other plants, and would do so byclaiming family problems.

Thesekindsofrefusalsto follow orders werenever direct refusals, but usuallyI excuses, devious wayss to insist on gettingone's owm way.

In these kinds of situations, since they could not cut wages,reduce bonuses, and could not punish, there was nothing one could do.Theycould just increase the number of workers, and this was6very wasteful.

Because leaders knew if they worked real hard, they

Why lazy? (lan)would be more likely to be criticized, and also knew that whether they workedhard or not, would get the same income.How could people get away with this?Because after l957 they gradually developed a situation where leaders got bynot because of qualities but because of their speaking abilities--they knewwhat to say when party secretaries, plant directors and other leaders cameby. How did these unqualified leaders get by in their jobs?They made useof those with qualifications who didn't know how to talk politics.

Thisbecame a 1regular practice inI enterprises.

Why disunited? (san) There was remaining factionalism among theadministrators.They had old cadres who had previously stood aside, and thenyounger cadres who had climbed up from the ranks, and also others whowere new and had been transferred in.Factionalism was a lot like thatin universitiess and other units.In some plants all the workers from a certainprovince would stick together.These kinds of factional ties were related to

-20-the possibilities for promotions. One's actual power depended on these kindsof ties.  A vice-director recently transferred into εhe..plantihad-:--: a dif-ficult time getting orders followed because he had no connections.It took along time for him to build up thesee ties before people would listen to hisorders. Friendship facilitated the carring out of orders, kind of a formof helping out friends by carrying out their requests.

This was called beinga member of a 'group' (banzi), or an informal group of friends like this.If the members of a banzi needed something， others would carry out orders morequickly than those of other people who weren't in the group.

This happens in other professional groups--schools, institutes, etc.Groups formed on the basis of where you received your education, what provinceyouarefrom，etc.The chief of these sorts of contradictions was that betweenthe older cadres and younger ones who had 'climbed up' over the backs ofothers during the CR.These groups didn't get along together, the youngerones, the 'climbers', were referred to by the following two phrases:"attack others, raise yourself" (daji bieren, taigao ziji), and "climb upwards,standing on thee shoulders of others" (tazhe bie ren de jianbang, xiang shang pa).In other words, the older cadres didn't think too highly of these people at allIt was felt to be a major injustice and inequality.They also had a group ofnew people transferred in recently, they often formed another group, comp?icatingthe factional situation.

This was a normal situation in plants, called 'factionalism' ((paixing).The more serious, political factions related to issuas of higher importancewere called by a different term: zongpai.(this means faction in the sense ofsect, which implies shared beliefs--Aw).

They had this sort of non-political,everyday factionalism before the Cultural Revolution, but not as seriously,since the personal conflicts of the CR era were added in.

Political factionalismwas not particularly strong in the Cultural Revolution sense, since many of theold factions were done away with after the CR.Lin Biao and Confucius Campaign

This was in 1974.1During this period he was mainly in research institutes,

This campaign was most active inbut was also in factories sometimes for visits.the Spring of 1974.1 It was largely theoretical, generally in study groupswhereworkersS and staff would just say whatever was printed in the newspapers.The materials to study were never really clear about just who was beingattacked, but everyone had a general idea that this was against Zhou Enlai.Theyformeda "Movement Office"((yundong bangongshi) for each of the majorcampaigns during this period. They were supposed to be temporary, but theyhad so many campaigns during this period that they ended up being semi-permanertoffices.They were responsible for leading the campaign, but really were underthe Party leader.

They formed study groups of various types in different levels--shops,plant-level,(departmental，1research institutes--to study the campaign materials.They used up a lot of time--work time--and a lot of personnel to do this.Thepeople who participated were more often than not the 'activists'. Also manypeople were willing to leave their everyday work to do this.They did nothave overtime to make up for lost hours.The political workKdepartmentsineach unit were very powerful at that time.They just calledlup X,Y,and Z shopsand said,"pull outt 2-3 workers from their jobs, people with good politics andabitofeducation,,and send them over to form a study group".Then these peoplewould meet full time inl an office for 6 months or longer to'study'.But Ifeels that since so few of them ever produced any real articles, that theyspentmostoftheirtimee 'resting', smoking cigarettes.There was no overtime,work just didn't get done.

-21-

Nobody in I's institute or in the factories he was familiar with wasattacked during this movement, but he did hear that in other provinces whenthis movement started, the political workers in enterprises were happy, thoughitthat a second cultural1revolution was coming, and that their positions wouldbe even more powerful and prominent.Also, at that time many technicians andengineers were afraid that the movement might turn critical of them, but thisnever actually happened.: In other provinces, he heard that intellectuals wereattacked, and so the intellectuals in his unit had the impression that theirvalue would soon fall.

Later, beginning in March l975, the campaign to study the Dictatorshipof the Proletariat began, and had roughly the same influence on production asdid the anti-Lin movement, and for the same reasons.But this movement didn'thave as large an influence on production as did the l974 movement.11975 wasthe busiest time of the l970s for his unit, while 1974 was a time when theyrested a lot. In l976 the factional struggle 'exploded'.1976, Conflict Surrounding Succession

During l976, they did very little work in his institute, they justcame in and chatted, read the newspaper.

The leaders didn't have time toattend to both politics and production, and production came last.Alsoaotof themwere just waitingtosee the outcomeof factionalstruggles beforethey acted.Everyone was well aware of power struggle at the top, andafter the Tiananmen incident of April 5, some were afraid that the Gangof Four would rule: China after Mao's death.sSo in l976 there was basicallyno work in the institute, and production slowed in factories--first theyhad criticism of Deng, later criticism of the Gang of 4 too.

The criticism of the Gang of 4 was not very thorough in Peking, sinceWu De was still the Party Secretary of the city. The criticism campaign wasless energetic that the Pi Lin campaign and the criticism of Deng.They had2 leaders in their institute who were basically followers of the Gang of 4,their methods and thought were the same.But they weren't criticized at all.I says that scientists were all pretty unhappy about this, but among hisfriends they would only criticize themin private.  But in other plantsandinstitutes run by the National Government, where he had friendssworkingthis movement was carried out better; they directly criticized cadres andput up wallposters.Cadres in his institute were never actually criticized.New Wage Adjustmentsand Bonuses

Near the end of l977, they had a wage adjustment which went on until1978.About 40% of employees were given a raise.AccordingtotheStateCouncil Document, there were 3 conditions.He can't remember them all clearly.One important one was the level of ability and work contribution.Politicalshowing·was also to be a part, but not stressed. But there were flaws inimplementation.

People were to be assessed by the masses for these raises,and in form they were, but the Party Committee could control the proceedingsof these appraisals to a considerable extent, and in fact did so.

In fact, peoplee were appraised highly for other, non-work related

wereespeciallyfavorablyevaluatedwerethosewhoreasons.The people whowere not Party members but were preparingthemselves for admission by gettingclose with Party committee members, being active politically, listening to theparty line.These people had a better chance, given rough equality in otherareas.  So at times the raises boiled down to whether or not the Party secretarythought you were a good person--whether your name stuck in his mind whenwinnowing down the list of nominees.

They didn't set up any strict year lines for raises, but the olderworkers tended to be favored over the younger.

-22-

In the last half of 1978 they began bonuses in the factories, and inI's institute they had one in l979 before he left. Had levels l,2, and 3 intowhich people were appraised, and also those whc gotino bonus at all. Thesewere usually people who had made major work or political mistakes in the past.Otherwise, these bonuses were appraised quarterly in the institute.  Mostpeople were grade 2. Grade one was 20￥, grade 2 was l0¥, grade 3, 6-8¥.But people felt the differences were too small. Some said that lo￥ perevery 3 months was nothingto work hard for.  But others wanted higher gradebonuses, for purposes of reputation. So in a sense these 'material' incentiveswere more 'moral' than anything else.

Also, material incentives had limits because even if they had a lotof money, commodities were still hard to buy.TTherewerechronicshortagesof minor articles. This was especially bad in l976 and early 1977. Therewere shortages of matches, cooking pots, bowls, etc.  So some people stillfind bonuses uninteresting because it is difficult to buy so many things.The situafion with commodities got a little better during lc78-79, but stil1there were a lot of things that were hard to buy, like books.

一23-

描述：

