id: 844c89b421
标题：Hong Kong Interviews: Informant No. 74
日期：1984-6-22,1984-6-23
是否是时间段：false
作者：Andrew G. Walder
来源：
标签：文章
书籍：Hong Kong Interviews: Informant No. 74
书籍作者：Andrew G. Walder

正文：
No。 74Background1(6/22/84，3hrs)

He was a guerilla fighter in Guangdong, recruited in Hong Kong inthe 1ate 1940s。After the liberation of Guangdong the Party rewardedhim for his revolutionary service by sending him to school to become acadre.

They sent him to the accounting department of South China Univ。for 10）months。After that he was sent to workinthe accounting officeoftheGuangdong provincial government，and in l952 he was sent to workin the accounting office of a steamshipcompany。In1956hewassentto the accountingg office of the communications ministry in Peking to studySoviet management methods, especially financial aspects。 HHetook5monthsof classes in Peking, and all his classmates were accountants。 In l957he was criticized and1 punished duringgthe Anti-Rightist campaign。He hadraised1 a rather mild criticism of the Party, as they had asked loyalcadres to do。 1But even though he had the best of possible class backgrounds--3 generation worker, worker chushen, fought in the was, and was trained

He just talked to much during the campaign,bythe partyy for leadership。he says.

Later he was rehabilitated in 1979。BHe was treated lightly; hewas demoted 3 pay grades, and became the director of a small communefactoryfor 9 months，then was sent to a cadre school。FBy 1960 he wassent to a factory as a shop director.in a plant producing glucose (putao tang).The factory was under the province'sparty school。Itwasaserviceorganization under the district (diqu)party organization。There were only10-20peoplee working in it。It was set up during the 3 years in orderto make sure that party officials had enough to eat。Their productswere for party officials alone。1He did this for one year。

After that he was transfered to a shipbuilding yard in Zhanjiangthat employed about 500 people。He was the head of the accountinggdept。,

The kezhang was someone who really1 didn't knowinfact but not in name。anything about accounting, but he was a party member, unlike the informant.He worked in this position from 196l to 1970,when he was sent to a May7 cadre school。There was a lot of violence in his plant then, and itbasically closed down for a long period。 He was in the cadre school for3 years。

He requested a transfer to another unit in l973 sohe couldlive with his wife, who worked in Yanjiang。Hewasassignedtoacountylevel cement factory, state owmed, that employed about 200 people。lHeworked there until he left China with his family in 1979。FBefore beingassigned to the cement plant, but after being released from the cadreschool,he worked as a peasant for 6 months，and in a smallruralcollectivefactory.

He says. the main reason why China is still backward is that theydon't follow their own regulations。From thetime heleft school he wasopposed to the Party's management methods because they were backward (thiswas the gist of his loo flowers criticism)。The regulations are contradicted

The head of the finance department does not have the powers heby reality.is supposed to have。If he opposes illegal practices or corruption onthe part of the party secretary, he can be accused of political mistakeslater on, and can be struggled, called a class enemy.This happened notjust duringg the cultural revolution but through the entire 30 years he wasin China.

A second problem:if you want to become an official, you have tolisten to officials and tell falsehoods,conceal the true situation。Hebrings up the example of the Great Leap forward。 The problem there was that

(2)the top officials' targets were completely unrealistic, but to insist thatthey were unrealizable would be to get yourself in trouble。Sciencewasthrown out the door (He gives an example about hastening the productionof steel that is identical to one given by several informants in 1979-80)。

The third problem is that prices are not really understood,theyare not meaningful.Labor has no price at all。They don't understandthe economics of Marx or anyone else。The Chinese communists are idealistsinhis（opinion。They take the sayings of Marx and Mao about the evolutionof human society as a virtual guarantee of economic and social progress.They are not materialists。They just try to do things according topolitical principles that theythink are "correct"aaccordingtopoliticalprinciples.Labor has no price。They just pour it into production inorder to meet targets and1 get production。In his opinion all the problemsboil down to the fact that labor has no price。This is the basicCcauseofwaste, false reports, low quality。(On paper, they do figure the price oflabor under costs,but this is another example of the rules beinggincontradiction with reality.

The system as a whole, further, "rewards the lazy and penalizes thehardworking".. This is something that Li Yizhe said, and they were right.The cadres get the most, workers second, and peasants last。Among cadres,the hardest working are those who are rewarded the least, because the morethey do, the more possible it is to make a mistake。When a campaign comesaround,it will be very easy tofind something toget them for; but thosewho don't do anything are the safest, and get promoted first because, sincethey don't do anything,tthey don't make any bbig mistakes。Being lazyiSsimply a "contradiction among the people", 1not at all serious。But tomake mistakes was often a contradiction betweenthe enemy andthe people.

What about the recent reforms?  Yes, they are on the right track, butit will take a long time。You can see the beginning of the sprouts ofchange，lbut only the beginnings.Deng would have to live much longer.It will take another 30 years of these policies to begin to change things.If Deng wereon1y35years old， I would be optimistic。1But in fact as longas the party is in power it will be very difficult to change。

Why?11Becauseinhis6 opinion the communist party is quite reactionary。First, theyoppress people and harm their interests, they obstruct the development ofproduction.and social progress; in fact they sabotage production.Capitalismand capitalists are not nearly so reactionary。TThey work withboththeirminds and their hands, and speed production。They are not bureaucrats.Communist officials just sit around and forbid people to do things。Theyobstruct activity。But capitalists, at least, are hastening production;theirs is a very high, abstract form of labor.Hong Kong will experiencethisafter 1997.When the reactionary cadres come, so will the problems.People here don't understand this yet, nor do the economists; but they willin time。Factory Accounting

These rules are set by the Ministry of Finance。‘The account bookheadings are the same for all factories。They have fixed headings:fixed capital, government funds, production expenses, business income,

The system is fine on paper, the problem is that it isn't practicedprofit.the way it should be.

Thefinancedepartment is supposedto managethefactoryaccording tocost principles。Lowering of costs is supposed to be the aim。Hastentheturnover of floating capital--this way you use less money to do more work.

(3)The money works harder this way。You are supposed to protect and maintainmaterials and finished products, prevent corruption and theft; preventspoilage and waste.

But in practice things are quite different。 Waste is greater in thissystem than in any other。First, warehouse management is bad.When I wasin the shipbuilding plant I found consistent shortages in the storeswhen compared to the records。JIinvestigatedandfound that thethingshad been taken by the top officials。What can you do in this situation?The top cadres like incompetent heads of the finance department for thisreason--they never inspect。  lIfound the samethinginthecementfactory(it had happened in the shipbuilding plant as well)。

The plant directorthere had stolen 30o0 tons of cement over the years。The party secretarywas in on it too。WhatdidIdo?I asked for sick leave for three years。I couldn't report it to the above levels because I had been punished beforeduring the anti-rightist campaign and they wouldn't believe me againstthe word of these two officials。And it would get back to the leaders,and they would have a campaign and declare me a counter-revolutionary.

Another source of waste: a procuring agent for the factory wentout and got us 3oo tons of coal, but he didn't arrange for transport。

Soit sat by the riverside for 2 years。FEventually a big flood washed mostof the coal away。 This was a case of waste caused by the system.

Loweringg costs: this includes variable costs; and constant costs。Constant costs:management costs, wages,(depreciation of fixed capital。We could have cut constant costss by keeping labor to a minimum,releasingthose not needed。But the partyJ secretary didn't recognize this andhe was interested only in other criteria of success:he like to do politicalwork well; promote worker activism, biaoxian, volunteer work after hoursand on weekends，and so forth。He didn't：understandtheimportof loweringcosts, and he didn't care.This was a case of the waihangg leading neihang。He didn't know about such things。 Deng now wants to changethis，butis is really beyond his power to do so。There is a saying:"Good thingstake l0 years to carry through, bad things can be completed in only 3 days."I'1l give you an example:in only three days tthere were no pots leftfor many peasants during the backyard furnace campaign during the Great Leap.

Mistaken propaganda is another problem.

They reward "spirit" (jingshen)and penalize science。They are interested inn people's "thought", nottechnical abilities.

The finance department in the shipbuilding plant had one cashier,five accountants, a head accountant:(me)，and the dept。head。Thehead

He didn't do any work, just didof the departmenttwasapartymember。ideological work。Again,an example of waihang leading neihang.

These five accountants were overwhelmed with work, and had to workovertime every night。'This wasn'tt a good idea, we needed a new system.I devised a new accounting system, and after that we no longer had towork late every night。When the head of the personnel department heardaboutthishetransferedtoaccountantsout。Sowehadtoworkovertimeagain。SSo there was no use in trying to improve work methods。Theydidn'tcare about work efficiency.If you didn't work overtime you weren't working

They promoted people according to their thought,hard in their opinion.their total effort, but no work efficiency.Irregularities and Corruption

What is they discovered irregularities in the warehouse or in finances,couldn't this be reported?

It depends。1Ifyoureportsomeonebelowyou

(4)in rank, you will be praised.If you report some one above you in rank,later on they might find a lot of problems in your own historical record.If you are going to report someone higher than you, you must consider thatperson'ttconnection with the top leader。If you accuse someone who isclose personally with the top leader,then he might interpret it as an attackon him personally。Theonly partysecretaries orfactorydirectorsw ho are punished for corruption are those who lack connections withleaders in the leading organs above the factorywho can protect them.

Thecontradiction is this:forsomeonetobeatopfactoryleaderinthefirst place you have to have good guanxi with some leader above the factory;so its hard to catch and punish the top factory leaders if they are guiltyo

Won't stealing show up0inrecords?Only if you have an excellentaccounting system。In the cement factory，different grades of cement tookdifferent mixes of materials, and different grades were produced。

Soyou had to keep track precisely of the different grades6producedand thematerials used in what proportions。The plant director was taking awaythecement beforeit gotintothe warehouse whereit wasrecordedascompleted。Sohowdidhe findout about the plant director'stheft?1I very(carefullycompared our consumption of materials with the products put into the ware-house。It wasa very low level of efficiency in materials use。SoImade the workers put cardson each of the finishedlots before theyweresent to the warehouse， and found that 3ooo tons disappeared。That'swhen I took sick leave。Why?1Because if I didn'treport it and thedirector was caught, I could be accused of being in on it, or would beaccused of doing it nmyself, because I am supposed to report these thingsif I find out about them.But they weren't onto the fact that I knew,so I just took sick leave to get out of the situation.Accounting in Relation to Sales and Supply

(6/23/84, 3 hrs)

Theaccountingdepartment sent documents (danju)

Documents and Records:tothesalesandsupplydepartmentinorder for them to buy things legally(some came.from the company and bureau, but not all supplies)。They areused for commodity sales,the transfer of materials between enterprises,andtheyare used for the procurement of materials。  Actually there is onlyonekindl of form，but tthey are entered into different accounts。Theyare used in commoditypurch, procurement, and also in the use of labor;this is under costs。Thenthereissales income, then sales of materials.There are four copies for these transactions。They8giveeoneasa receiptto the purchasing unit; one copy goes to the sales and supply1dept。；onecopy to the finance dept.;and a fourth is the bill of lading used for

This form eventually returns to the sales andpicking up the materials.supply dept.

Thereisanothersetofdanjufortheemovementofmaterials。First,procuring agent's cash vouchers((linghuan)allowsthem todrawmoneyand

The amount is not specified in advance--itbuy thingsfor the factory.can't be.It allows him to purchase materials from the plant's accounts。When he purchases somethingit is filled out and returned with the amountenteredtothefinancedepartment。‘The procuringIaagentseitherhavecashier'scchecks or actual cash before they go out, but theyy have to report it later.Then there is a receipt given by the other factory with the price andproduct written in, this goes back to the finance department too.

Thisone place where corruption may arise:the materials are bought and paidfor legally but never really delivered to the plant.

Then there are warehouse receipts (danju)。First, the shouliao dan。

(5)There are also four copies of this form。One goes to the persons deliveringthe goods, the second goes to the sales and supply department, which managesthe warehouse, the third goes to the finance department, and the fourththe warehouse keeps.

There is another form for removing materials from the warehouse; thechu cang dan。The first copy goes to the people receiving materials;the second goes to the finance cdepartmentandisenteredundertheincomeaccount; the third goes to the sales and supply department; and the fourthis kepttbythe warehouse。The warehouse does the same thing if it isone of our own workshops that is picking up materials; this is recordedand the finance department calculates it as part of the costs of a shop.

All of this, he stresses, is a very general account。 The wholeprocedure is containedin a thick volume in China that would take a monthand a half to read.

What I've just described is a very orderly situation, but not manyfactories are run this well,and have backward management。I would guessthat9o%ofthefactoriesinnChinadon't add upallthe accountsintheway the book specifies，and their figures don't match for many of theaccounts that they do figure up。

Sources of Corruption and Irregularities:1) They don't use the shou liao dan properly.

We might get theform but not the materials。It never reaches the warehouse。The financedepartment doesn't always know what's going on with the procuring agents;though sometimes they are in on it。SSomefactoriesdon'ttevengivecopiesto everyone of all these forms。

2)Barter。 If they barter goods rather than sell them, it doesn'tinvolve these forms at all。They use the high quality goods to trade forlow quality, or large numbers for small, and other plants will throw inmoney to complete the deal and the moneyis not reportedtoanyone。

3）Illegal business。7There are no private businesses in China.But some procuring agents go into business for themselves。In other words,they keep the extra money for themselves.This might be legal in HongKong,but not in China。S Some procuring agents will use the money to buyand sell things for their own profit。

4) The.Backdoor。 You give things to me, and I'll sell you whatyou need。 A tape recorder, TV, or something is given by procuring agentstothe sales and supply department of another factory to ensure a sale。This is very widespread.。

Costs in Relation to Sales and Supply:

Costs include the following items: materials, power, wages, deprecia-tion, management expenses (not figured into the production-related expensesof the shops.,.this limited by regulation but in reality is circumvented).The records kept to keep track of costs:materials (the forms describedabove; power (according to the meters, distributed among products, thefactory itself does thee reading, not the utility); wages(according tothe wage tables, peopleesign for their checks); depreciation （ a fixedrate according to national regulations); and management expenses.

This is the general idea, but not everyfactorydoes it this way.The practices have to vary according to the production process。: In somefactories an accountant has to be a technicalexpert to understand productionand figure costs, but not in most cases.

(6)Relationship Between Leading Organs and the Factory

There are two leading organs。Theindustrialbureauandthefinancebureau。 In our cement factory it was the county industrial bureau。Thefinance bureau of that level of government also directed us。 The indus-trial bureau was not concerned with the financial aspects; they maintainedcontrol through the director and the shuji。The plant director is responsibleto the bureau head。 The factory party secretaryis responsibletotheparty committee of the industrial bureau。There are two parallel levelsof administration.

The industrial bureau handles production planning at the beginningof the year.

This is handled by the production statistics dept。of thefactory, and reports are made to that department of the bureau.Afterthis production plan is figured out, the finance department makes a costsplan,translating the production plan into money terms。Average cost peritem is calculated。The total costs are a simple sum of the production.costs for all produced items。The profit plan is also figured out at thistime。According to the costs per item, profit level is fixed。 SSometimesthey lose money。They have to get permission to lose money beforehand andthen the amount is made up by the finance bureau。All the things mentionedabove are calculated as part of costs。

Turnover rate of liquid capital; the factory gets a target for thistoo。Before 1957 this was enforced strictly,butafter the anti-rightistcampaign, we were not really held to it。 In l960 or thereabouts Lin Biaohad a famous saying, "Don't figure accounts for 3 years, money can'trunoverseas，tthe meat will stay in the pot, and no damage wiil be done."This was never published to my recollection, but all of us cadres heardof it。1Lin was a genius in military matters, but when it came to economicshe was a real idiot--just like Mao.

After the production and financial plans are fixed, then they arechecked and approved by the industrial bureau。 TTherewere8targets-too many。II prefer 3--profit, labor productivity, and turnover。 Ifyou meet all of these, everything else will work itself out.

Every month, the factory must report to the industrial bureau theproduction,(quality, and statistical forms.[With the financial bureau,they have a monthly accounting。 They have a form reporting total assets,one for calculating costs of production,affinancial income form,anda profit calculation form。We just filled out the forms and sent them in.Only in anti-corruption campaigns did they sent people down to the factoryto audit.

Every quarter, an additional set of reports;turnover of liquid capital;fixed capital depreciation, and a zhengfu zijin zengjian biao,a formreporting on.the sufficiency of the funds delegated to the plant by thegovernment.

Because this is all self-reporting, it is very easy to report falsely.They only audited during campaigns。1My factory director wanted me to fillout false reports, but I wouldn't because if an anti-corruption campaigncame they would blame me, not the director. So we had very bad relations,a big contradiction between us。]I was afraid he would get back at me whenI applied to come to Hong Kong because he had to approve the forms alongwith the party secretary.

Other accounting categories: finished products,1materials, and debts.We can juggle these 3 categories between months andquarters, adding theincome but not the delivery of the item so it won't look like we're losing

SowesellI some goods in this month and report that under income,money。

(7)but still report those sold goods as part of our inventory。Thenextmonth we will put down those items as having left our inventory。 This isonly an effective method in the short run,because in the long run，thefactory's liquid capital is reduced and we no longer have enough money todobusiness。

They hadcampaigns all the time to catch corruption。But this createdcontradictions。There were tensions between the plant director and thehead of the finance department,and the masses were asked to exposecorrupt practices。 If they did this, and the plant director was caught,he would make a self-criticism quickly, but in most cases he would stillbe in power after this。If you are the one who turned him in, then hewill surely take revenge on you later。 (The implication is that if youare going to turn someone in you had better be sure that the person willbe removed from office as a result, if not, you will run out of luck lateron)。TThey would send a work team down to inspect the factory's books andask to reports from the masses。Butsometimesusingthismethodwasnoteffective; sometimes they grab people who aren't really guilty, whilethe guilty ones get away (he seems to be reflecting here on his ownsituation described above)。These campaigns created more problems thanthey solved。 (He has already made clear above that he thinks that carryingout the regulations faithfully would make these campaigns unnecessary;and this would mean giving the finance department real powers).

描述：

