id: 8a56e34055
标题：Hong Kong Interviews: Informant No. 46
日期：1980-5-24,1980-5-31
是否是时间段：false
作者：Andrew G. Walder
来源：
标签：文章
书籍：Hong Kong Interviews: Informant No. 46
书籍作者：Andrew G. Walder

正文：
INFORMANT NO. 46PERSONALDATA

MaleAge:43

Sex:Education:Medical College graduateTotal Years Relevant Experience:

5Last Year of Relevant Experience: 1968

Year Left China:1980Initial Immigration Status: LegalNativePlace/overseasConnections:Jiangsu native/ostiesunknownClass Background/Political Designation:1Landlord

OCCUPATIONAL HISTORY SUMMARYPositions Held: l) Factory doctor, Shanghai Textile Factory, 1964-68

2) Medical worker in vi1lages, 1968-73

3) Chief of Internal Medicine, Provincial Hospital, 1973-80Administrative Level of Work Urit/(No. of employees);

1) Municipal/(4000)APPOINTMENTS:2

TOTAL HOURS:  3

PAGES TEXT:

2No. 46Occupational History(5/24/80，1hr.)

The informant was born in l937 to a landlord family in Jiangsu. Hegrew up in Shanghai.After graduation from medical school he worked in atextile factory in Shanghai, as the clinic doctor, from l964-68.Froml960-64, right after graduation, he worked as a doctor in a Shanghaihospital, and was later transfered to the factory. In l968 he was sent tothe countryside for a while, living in the villages, and later did workin a small county hospital.In l973, they implemented the party's intell-ectual policy. and he was transfered to a provincial hospital where he waschief of internal medicine.He did this until January l980, when he cameto Hong Kong legally.Experience as Factory DoctorC(5/31/80, 2 hrs.)

He was the leading doctor of the factory clinic.They had under l00beds in the clinic, this for a work unit of 4ooo employees.The beds werefor outpatients.They had both an inpatient and outpatient clinic. Thebed-staff ration was l.l, so they had about loo staff workers.Therewerefive kinds of staff workers.They had a party branch secretary, and aclinic head (yuanzhang) who was also a party member, and the head of theclinic.1He could be a doctor, but sometimass he was not. But this persondidn't need to know about the business.They had over 20 doctors, and about20 nurses.  In addition there were a lot of political workers and partystaff, also cashiers, accountants, receptionists, and administrative personneland service workers.

All thedoctors inthe clinic had the power tosign workers'sicknesscertificates, a sick leave form.Once the form is signed, they must notifythe shop and group leaders. He will give a certain number of days rest.Thenthe form has to get approved by the section or group leader.1But in mostcases they just follow the doctor'ss opinion.1But sometimes, if the doctorfills out the form for 7 days of rest, the shop or section leader mightapprove it only for 3-5 days.The doctor makes the judgment about how manydays rest a person needs.

Were there any people who weren't really sick but just wanted leave?Yes, too many!  There were two ways this took place.1First, if the personhad good relations with the doctor they would just tell him up front thatthey needed a rest, had family problems, etc.These were people that had goodguanxi.The second way was that a worker would come in complaining of asickness, but would be feigning illness.This is more difficult becausescience isn't so advanced.What if a person has a headache?No amount ofexamining can tell you whether the person reallyY has a problem or not.So itsdifficult.

The first method usually worked, because these people have good relationswith the doctor and the doctor has sympathy with them.  The second method alsoworks most of the time because of the:limits of science.The real problemis not sickness but that people aren't interested in their work.The mostcommon method of getting sick leave was the first.

There were ways of going through the back door.If you don't know adoctor personally you ask for the help of a friend who knows a doctor.Thenthe friend can introduce him to the doctor and help set up good relations.It was very common for doctors to receive gifts and favors from workers.Apples, oranges, candy. small things worth no more than about 2-3¥ or so.Doctors could also get free repairs from people who would come to his home.On occassion, they would give you grain ration tickets, although they didn't

-1-need these, since they had enough and they were very common.

The informant says he had no use for these things personally.because he got overseas remittances and his family's economic situation was

When he was offered these favors he refused.1But people wouldvery good.insist and sent them to his house.  Other doctors would accept these things--almost as much as leading cadres who were the worst in this respect.RHelooksdown on these practices, and says it is a shortcoming, and calls the manydoctors who do accept these gifts "philistines"((yes, he comes up with theenglish word for this).

They always had this problem, but before the cancellation of the bonussystem in l965 it was not widespread.  But it got progressively worse after1965. Especially during and after the cultural revolution, right up to1978. There was about l0 years when this was a major problem.  Of coursethe party secretary woulda set limitations on the number of sick leave formsto give out, but this was just his personal order, not a set regulation. Soenforcement was lax.If he happened to be interested in the problem thatmonth, the partyI secretary might check the records, but mostly he just gavethe order and forgot about it.?The enforcement of these kinds of small edictswas just a mess.Each secretary made up his own laws and rules, but therewas nosystem of regulations and enforcement.

Cadres would sometimes do this sort of thing to get sick leave, butthis was rare because their work conditions were better than workers; andthey could relax at work.Provincial Hospital Experience

He worked in a cadres ward. There were special privileges for cadresdepending on the time period we're talking about. Right after liberation allcadres were about the same.But uptothetimeoftheCRcertainlevelsofcadres had developed to the point where they enjoyed special privileges--better, bigger rooms, more expensive medicine and better service.Eventheattitude of the attendants were different.

During the high tide of the CRthey completely did away with these privileges, but within a year they hadcome back.

Cadres also fled to these hospitals when they feared a political campaign.This began in the l95os, and continued right up to the beginning of the CR.But it was most serious at the time of the CR.(Cadres usually came to thehospital to escape criticism, or to lick their wounds after losing astruggle.(Cadres from all levels came in at that time, because there werestruggles from the party center right down into units.Sometimes they wentearly because they knew a political struggle was coming, and sometimes theywent right in the midst to escape, and sometimes went after being struggledanddefeated.They of course continued to draw full wages duringthehospitalization.The old ones would claim arteriosclerosis or hypertension,which of course most of them had anyway.But theywere not soserious asto require a hospital stay.FBut they insisted on admission.

-2-

描述：

