id: e4a3ea9906
标题：Hong Kong Interviews: Informant No. 73
日期：1984-6-20,1984-6-25
是否是时间段：false
作者：Andrew G. Walder
来源：
标签：文章
书籍：Hong Kong Interviews: Informant No. 73
书籍作者：Andrew G. Walder

正文：
No. 73

(6/20/84,3hrs)Background:

The informant was living in Hong Kong in l949， and went to Cantonright before it was liberated. After that he was not able to return toHong Kong until the endof l982.He attended a lower middle school forpeople with good class backgrounds--worker and peasant--and then attendeda technicalmiddleschool.In the l950s he was assigned to work as a fitteratasmallengine repairfactorythat employed200plus people.He wasa worker for some 8 years.AAfter eight years he was promoted to be aunion 'helper'（（ganshi)，which is an office job in the union committeeoffice at thefactory level.He says that he was promoted not because hewas an activist,bbut simply because he had an education andcould readand write. This was a small factory, and back inthe l950s a lot of armyofficers were beingdemobilized and sent to factories to be officials.They were mostly of peasant backgrounds, and not well educated.  So theyneeded to rely on people who could read and write, and who knew howto do things.They needed them to run the factory, because they werebasicallyincapable of doing it on their own.

The job of the union helper was to organize political study, culturaleducation among workers, technical education classes, visit sick workers

The office wasunderthe partybranchand solve their livelihood problems.secretary.The branch secretary ran everything in those days; he was evenmore powerful than the plant director.

After 2 years as union ganshi,he became a procuring agent.‘Thiswassduring the Great Leap Forward,and they needed a lot of materialsbecause they were trying to increase production, produce steel. He didthis work for over ten years, and was eventually promoted to be head ofthe sales and supplydepartment, which oversaw al1of the procurementwork,as well as the sales and warehouse operations.He did this forabout ten years.From 1959, when he became a procuring agent， to 1978,when he was transfered to another unit,he was involved in sales andsupply.  1In l978 he changed jobs, was transfered to the baowei ke,orsecurity department, of a construction company.Thiswaseasier work.The securitydepartment was in charge of guarding the half-finishedbuildings andpreventingtheftofconstruction materialsontheconstructionsites.Procurement Work

There are three basic kinds of procuring agents.One is to procure"large hardware" (da wujin)--steel, pig iron, coal, pipes, sheet metal,construction materials. A Another kind is "small hardware"--spare parts,bearings, drill bits, tools of all kinds。 The third is waixie (lit。outside cooperation)， or to look for plants outside to subcontract operationsfor you。This was stressed especially after l966, and is used even downto today,, but especially up to l978。 It was stressed because there wasa lack off materials, and because workers didn't have productive activism.They were too slow and couldn't finish things on time (note: one managementreaction to slow work pace is to spread work out to smaller firms).

There were two sources for big hardware。First, the above levelssupply it to you in the plan--the bureau or company.Evenif they put itin your plan, it is still not certain that you will actually get it。1InCanton our municipal hardware company had many products but not always to

(2)your specifications。So you had to 'travel around and exchange' (chuan huan).This was very common from the Cultural Revolution to 1979。And the bureausdidn't always have enough1 steel to give the plants within the plan。

Theplants took as much steel as they could get, even if they didn't need it,andwoulduseittoexchangewithnanother。Forexample，theywouldexchangeal"1pipe for 2".

But there arose another contradiction。If every plantis buying everything they find available, and in larger (quantities thanthey need, their inventory(kucheng liang） is irrational, they are hoarding.But you can't always find someone who needs these things to trade, sosometimes they will sit in the warehouse for 8-l0 years。This freezes upliquid capital。

Everyfactory has its own warehouse。Ours kept 20,000 yuan of materialin it when it should have had only 5,000。FPeople went out to procureanythingthey could。 Factories would procure things they didn't even need.I would go to Shanghai and get large batches of tools, even though we didn'tneed so many。TThen after I returned with them to our plant, everybody wouldcome to us seeking to exchange things。

Thefactory had a production planning department that determinedtheneeds of the factory for production materials。They would raise it atproduction meetings of the factory committee (made up of all the plantand department level leading cadres)。Then they would give it to the headof the gongxiao ke,which is also called the cailiao ke in some factories。If theycan'tget the materials or parts,in Canton,they will go toShanghai，where everyone went bec ause it was the best industrial areain China。Sometimes, like in the mid-l970s, the Shanghai authoritiesdidn't wanttheirfactoriestorelease materialstoother provincesoutside the plan, but they still did it anyway, even though it wasforbidden。

There was a couple of wuzi jiaoliu hui in Canton each year。Sometimesthey were held by the province, sometimes by the city, and sometimesjust by a municipal industrial bureau。This was for the purpose ofallowing factories to get together, advertise what they needed and whatt hey had to sell。Sometimes at these meetings a factory would simplysell you things without adding any conditions，but sometimes they wantedsomething sold tothemin exchange。If you couldn't get things in time,sometimes the plant had toclose down until it got them.

Sometimes one had to use personal relations to get things。. IIfyougoto a man in1 charge of sales.of1pipeefor a hardware company，aand ask for1" steel pipe, he is likely to say"mei you'".Buthee probably still hassome。 So you offer himn a "trial good" (shiyong pin), or "sample", like aT.V. or a coupon to buy one, or you sell him a product of your factoryat a big discount (like an electric fan)。TThere is another method of usingpersonal relations.If you get along well with the cadres of another plant,you can request from them a loan of materials to beepaid back in kindlateron。

They used guanxi all the time,but almost never used the terms ganqingor yiqi in this regard。Sure,somepeople did, but it was not very wide-

Theguanxiinvolvedmainlygivinggiftsandsettingconditionsforspread.sales.Lychees, bananas, and so forth often helped to create guanxi wherethere was none before,1but we rarely brought up ganqing and yiqi.Some peopledid .try to rely on this, of course, but it was rare, and wasn't really a veryeffective method。 Sending gifts was more effective if you needed something

(3)for the plant。We sent gifts and carried things with us to Shanghaitocreate guanxi and make sure things were sent to us on time and tobe sure that we will be helped out。

Outside cooperation （waixie） is different。You have the materialsbut you need another unit to process it and help finish the work, to doa step of the production work。

We did not sign contracts, so there wasnothing we could do legally if they didn'tfinish on time。

But you couldgao guanxi with the leader of the other factory--take him out to eat, givethem small gifts。That's how you make sure your things will be done ontime。Otherwise you might get a lot of excuses, but no finished work.

During the Cultural Revolution years this was very common becauseof the lack of raw materials and workers were slow。SSo work was put out

During the cultural revolution they didn't worryto other factories.about costs，didn't really calculate them。One plant would paytheother for the service。Sometimes they didn't finish on time。You hadto send someone over to control（guan）tthem,keep after them to finish

"Soon time。You hadtokeepbothering their leaderswithquestions:where is our work you promised? Done yet? When will it be ready?Wereally need it soon。11 We put out work to all kinds of enterprises; state,urban collective,aand rural collective.1But you hadto be careful withthe collectives, especially the rural ones, because quality was oftenpoor and sometimes they could be very slow.Union Work

The union had the following responsibilities (in the l950s)。First,organize cultural and technical study classes for workers, usuallyin

Thisthe evenings or on saturday and sunday。SSecond, political study.was important then。They had 2, sometimes 3 nights a week。1It was organizedby the union small group head in the production group.Third,. solve workersmaterial problems, resolve marital disputes and familyarguments; and fourth,write slogans and posters during campaigns.

He was1 promoted to do this, he says, mainly because he could write.Back in the l950s most factoryleaders were very poorly educated, so hewas promoted because he had gone to school and could write。He was notpromoted in grade and pay, he still got grade 6 worker's pay。This wascalledd 'using workers as cadres' (yi gong dai gan)。'This became even moreprevalentt beginning in the 1960s。Why didthey dothis instead of formallypromoting people?Because the upper levels said that no more than 17.5%(he's not sure of the precise figure) of the employees could be cadres。The calculation of costs was very1lax（suibian）in China，so they sent alot of workers to do cadre work。They did all the politi cal work--writingslogans, posters, decorations, etc. They were called "black market cadres"(heishi ganbu).

In fact, he was a worker and worked without pay for that position thewhole time, even when he was a vice director of the plant in charge ofprocurement.This was because he was promoted to vice director duringthe Cultural Revolution, and in that period they didn't readjust wages for

Not until he was transferred to the baowei ke of theconstruc-a long time.tion company did he get an administrative grade。AAt workers grade 6 hemade 86 yuan a month.

It wasn't: so bad being a union cadre back then.They still had goodrelations with workers.Political thought was good。Nowdays nobody wantsto do this work。！Workers just aren't interested in politics。Backthentheunion still had some status in the workers' eyes; not any more。 1Now it isjust a formality.

(4)Fringe Benefits

There were hardship subsidies, given out according to a set formula;health supplements for sick and hospitalized workers; and subsidies forthe funerals of relatives。The factory had no housing, it was too small.They did not pass out liang piao, this was handled by tthe neighborhood。Theyused to pass out industrial coupons for bicyles, sewing machines, watches,andsoforth。But since l978 the supplies of commodities increased so muchthat the industrial coupon system was basically cancelled。If you wantedto travel, the factory had to give you a certificate and if you weregoing to visit your relatives, you got some travel money.More on the Sales and Supply Department (6/25/84, 3 hrs)

How is it that the factory can increase its inventories (kucheng liang)without the upper levels detecting this? Originally when they used tomanage turnover of liquidcapital verytightlytheycouldcontroltheinventories because the liquid1capitalwouldbegin1 to disappear if youheldinventories that were too large。If that happened(meaning isthe1950s, which this informant appears to view as the golden years), therewould be an inventory·carried out at the behest of the upper levels.Usually twice a year they had a qing cang cha ku, or inventory, tocheck on each factory。The above levels notifieddyouandthefactorycarriedout theinventoryitself。Thereweretwousesfordoingthis:to get funds moving again, and to put materials into circulation thatanother factory might need.

They want you to go to a materials exchangemeeting.

Theecontradiction is that if you have stockpiles of thingsthateveryone wants but is much more than you need, you will still want to holdonto it because it helps you get what you really need。But the upper levelswant you to report it,,and if they know what you have they willwant youto move it out。So you underreport.This is benwei zhuyi.It is notreally considered false reporting(xu bao)，just benwei zhuyi。It is a self-reportingsystem,

It is very hard for the above levels to investigate this。They can'tcheck everyone all the time。They will only send people down in verylarge cases of underreporting。They never sent people down to do investi-gation of our stores veryy carefully。

They would just bringdownformsthatwe filled out ourselves。

Money and Procurement。When they bartered goods they didn't botherwith money。In China money is of little consequence。The prices are set

They can't give you a highercentrallyand they don't mean very much。price for your goods because that is illegal.

So they just swap things.They don't fill out any forms.All procuringgagentsneedisthepermissionof the department head and they go ahead with the trade.

If you go to the materials exchange meetings organized by the bureau,city, province, or national ministry, things are done differently.Theysign regular contracts。1I give you x amount of y commodity， and willdeliver it atz date。The prices of goods are fixed by the state, so thecontract specifies what the other factory gives in return。Thecontractgoes to the bank which transfers money between the two accounts。Sometimesthere are conditions, like the factory demands certain goods in exchangethat you don't have.If you can't meet them but very badly need the goods,you can ask officials oftheeorgansponsoringthemeetingtohelpyou.They will talk with them and try to convince them。Usually they can'trefuse because these are their bosses。This is called 'good communistspirit'.

(5)

At the materials exchange meetings the procuring agents havebasically no way to get any money for themselves。Moneyyis managedvery carefully so there is very little corruption。It is hard to pulloff。 The procuring agents do give things to cadres6 to get the goods.But not much--mostly food to eat, a dinner, yan jiu, etc.

Sometimes theywill get these things from the factory itself,waste articles。Somefactories will have the sales and supply department give them a littlebit of money for this。But mostlythe procuring agents will use alittle of their own money for this。Records and Finances

Everytime materials come，there is a form to fill out。The ware-house head signs the form specifying what has arrived in what amount.It is sent to the finance department。

Thecheckisthenissuedtotheoriginating company。

When buying goods, the finance department gives you money for anythingunder 30 yuan,for over that amount a check will be given if they knowthe total amount in advance。Sometimesif theydon't know the amount,they will send a blank check with the amount to be filled in later。But this is dangerous if you lose it so they control them very tightly.So instead they usually use a tuoshou dan (voucher?)。TThis form hasthe units name,tthe bank's chop, and a chop of the unit's finance dept.Thebuying unit can take this to the bank to get funds later。There isa fapiao (receipt) attached to it for the purpose of specifying the

It has aregular form with thefollowing blanks tofillamountspent。in:  Name of the item sold; specifications; amount of item; unit price;total price, and at the bottom line the total amount for all purchases.At the bottom they have a space for the name of the people getting thegoods, and his signature。At the top it has the name of the unit。Afterthe bank gets this, they transfer money between accounts。?There is aproblem with this。For a while peopleeused these indiscriminatelydespite the amount of money in their accounts。If it happens that thebank has a voucher not covered byfactoryfunds6they notify you。Youtell them when you'll have the money.If you won't have it for a longtime they won'tpay it。Then the other factory is out of luck and they

They started to be very strict about this after the begin-suffer a loss.

The finance （department strictly limited the amounts.ningofthe1980s。before sending out the voucher。They put a chop on it that guaranteedt hat they had the money in the account。During the cultural revolutionthey just gave more money to the unit if they ran into permanent difficultymeeting their bills, but noww they are more strict。

Usually. factories don'tcare that muchif theydon't get paid as

But if it is theylong as their own financial situation is not tight.might report to the upper levels for help.Usually this only means thatthey are paid late, not never paid,bbecause of the turnover of cash.Money will eventually arrive in the account of the factory because itssales will bringincome.

The situation after the beginning of the recent factory reforms:by l980 steel began to get to a situation of oversupply.Rolled steel from6 to 26mm in thickness was in abundance, and some companies had to lowertheir prices to get rid of it。  To l98l, early, it became tight again,verytight。But during those few years nobody had to go to a materialsexchange meeting to get rolled steel in those specifications.  Tools: (drill

(6)bits, cutting tools, saws, measuring tools, bearings, etc。,tthesewerevery scarce in the beginning of the 1960s, but in l979-80 they alsowere in full supply。Why did these thingsS get better then? I think itis because they tightened up on theeliquidcapitalfundsoffactoriesso they couldn't buy more than theyneeded。They began to control plantfunds and expenditures more tightlyIthen。The bank did this。Oneexampleof this·was the regulation that the finance dept。had to control thevouchers more tightly。There is also a better varity of products availablenow。 So now people are more likely to buy just what they need; thathelps make the supply situation better for everybody.Thebettertheselection, the better the situation with regard to hoarding。The mainreasonis that things are not in disorder now as inthe cultural revolution。Under the Gang of Four they didn't want to talk about money, only politics.So they didn't manage money very tightly。Now things are better。 Themain reason is the readjustment of the industrial system。Closing downfactories whose products are not needed,and putting them into the productionof scarce items。So the procurement situation improved for many goods。Many factories changed their product lines。For example, the provincialtractor factory changed over to the production of sewing machines。

As we prepare to close the interview, the informant begins a long andrather apologetic explanationof howitisdifficult for citizens ofChina to talk freely with foreigners about many things, even after theyleave the country.The psychological barriers still remain, he says,even after the threat of severe punishment is no longer there。  He alsoexplains that he has two children still in China, and repeats hisdesire for total confidentiality。 He obviously knows a great deal morethan he has said, and in fact appeared quite guarded throughout theinterview。He reveals before leaving what I suspected given the positionshe held as vice director and in the security department:thathewasa party member for over 20 years。But he appears petrified at the prospectof talking directly about enterprise partyaffairs,andagain apologizesbefore leaving.

描述：

