id: 6ecaf32c67
标题：Hong Kong Interviews: Informant No. 4
日期：1979-12-18,1979-12-21,1979-12-30,1980-1-3,1980-1-10,1980-1-14
是否是时间段：false
作者：Andrew G. Walder
来源：
标签：文章
书籍：Hong Kong Interviews: Informant No. 4
书籍作者：Andrew G. Walder

正文：
INFORMANT NO.4PERSONALDATA

Sex:  MaleAge:41

University graduate (Beijing U., radioactive chemistry)Education:Total Years Relevant Experience:12Last Year of Relevant Experience: l972

Year Left China:1972Initial Immigration Status: LegalNative place/0verseas Connections: Indonesian 0S, returned l950Class Background/ Political Designation:OS

OCCUPATIONAL HISTORY SUMMARYPositions Held:  l) Technician, Production Control Department, Phosphate

Mine, Kunyang, Yunnan, 1961-632) Kunming Auto Repair Plant, 1963, 1968-72

a) Technician, Laboratory, 1963

b) Repair worker, auto repair shop, 1968-72

3) Planning staff, Kunming Materials Bureau, 1964-68Administrative Level of Work Unit/(No. of employees):

1）unknown, probably province/(?)2）Municipal/(340)

3) Municipal/(?)Experience in Full-time Manual Labor (for non-worker occupations):

one-year labor tempering after graduation, l96l;production worker 1968-72

PAGES TEXT: 14

TOTAL HOURS: 15APPOINTMENTS:6No.4(Dec 18, 2 hrs.)Occupational History:

The informant is Indonesian by birth, lived there for l2 years beforemigrated to China with his 3 older brothers. They migrated to China in l950,for 2 reasons.First, it was easier to be admitted to university in China,and was cheaper, and they also wanted to escape the draft for the Indonesian

They went to Canton after a stopover in Singapore to get an immigrationarmy.

After about a month in Pekingg in 1950visa, and were then sent to Peking.they were sent to Harbin, where theeinformant received hissecondaryschooleducation.At that time in Harbin Russian presence was quite obvious, andthe Russian experts living there consumed quite conspicuously, enjoyed anumber of special privileges, and were not particularly well-liked. Hetells a number of anecdotes about Soviet war atrocities in Harbin whichwere remembered by the Chinese there, and about the status of Gao Gangatthetime.

In l956 he entered Beijing University, and studied in the radioactivechemistry department there, receiving his degree in l961.Upon graduationhe was dispatched to Yunnan, where he worked1atmanuallabor(duanlian)for

The workone year, as was the policy at that time for college graduates.unit was a well-known open-face phosphorous mine near Kunming7 vwhich originallywas a labor reform camp, and which the state turned into a state-run enterprisein1960.1Many of the workers there were ex-convicts from the labor camp days.Informant worked in the PhosphoricC acid shop.

In 1962 he was transferred to theediaodu ke in the same enterprise.Therehis job was to go to various workshops, find out the progress of production ineach, find out which shop needs more materials, tools, etc., and then arrangetohavethemdispatchedto0 the shops.This including arranging for transportof materiai.s into and out of the plant.The plant had five shops: l)caikuang--where the ore was broken up and loaded onto trucks; 2)linfei--where phosphatepowder made into phosphorous fertilizer; 3)mofen--where ore was crushed intopowder; 4) liusuan--suphuric acid shop; 5) 1lingsuan--phosphoric acid shop.

In l963 he was transfereed to the Kunming Auto Repair Plant. He claimedhe had a health problem, and had his overseas relatives write letters fromabroad to helpohim get out of his job at this6 rural phosphate enterprise.This enterprise was under the Kunming Municipal Transportation Bureau (ju).He was a cadre in charge of setting up a central laboratory for the transportbureau.This laboratory was for testing the composition of parts for locomotives.After this lab set up, he was again transferred, the same year, to the Wuzi Ju(materials bureau) of Kunmingcity.

There his work was to check on variouswarehouses in the city and to do inventories of factory stocks, and dispatchmotors to the countryside.He workedin the office in charge of warehousesand stocks (qingcang)

In l964 was transferred to a different section inthe Materials Bureauthe Machine and Electrical Products sectionjidian chanpin ke), where hetook part in planning work for the heavy industrialL system of the city,which included over loo enterprises.He worked here until l968 when, inthe midst of the Cultural Revolution, the factional infighting within thebureau became so intense that he thought it best to leave (since he was deeplyinvolved).He returned illegallytothe Auto Repair Plant where he hadexperiencee some years earlier, where he became a regular worker andengagedin1 manual labor in several shops.1At first he worked at disassemblingthe trucks and washingthe parts, then later worked inthe chassis, engine,and transmission shops, where he learned and performed1repair work.

In1970 his plant moved to thee suburbs, and combined with a large tractor plant.Still a worker, he began to work on tractor repairs.The plant tried fora while to produce autos, but with no success.In l972 he came legally to HK.

-1-(Dec 2l, 2.5 hrs.)Phosphate Mine Experience:

In l96l, after graduating from BeiDa, he was sent to Yunnan to do manuallabor for one year in the sulphuric acid shop.This was state policy at thetime.New technical gradutes had to do one year of manual labor.

His jobwas the toughest in the shop.He took chunks of sulphur, crushed it, refinedit, pumped it into furnaces to heat it, and then turned it into acid.

Thetemperature in his shop (itself the toughest in the entire enterprise)wasoftenabout44'degrees6 C, and the air was very acridd and irritating tothelungs and throat.ff you put chunks of sulphur into the acid bath too quickly.you would get burned by the acid. The acid itself was pumped into an ovenin liquid form and heated.1Liquid sulphur was pumped into the furnace likea shower.

He worked night shift, and began at midnight.Whenhefirstcametotheshop, he went to the storehouse(canku):)to pick up the blocks of sulphur, putthem in small, carts, and bringg them to the shop, where he crushed them upsothey couldbe melted.This was the most bitter job in the shop.Theygave him this job because workers didn't ordinarily like college studentsbecause they were boastful.Other students often argued with workers aboutthe theoretical side of the production process, and weretoo proud and boastful.The workers didn't like this at all. But I's methodl was not to talk toworkers unless he was spoken to, just do this menial job as best he coula.Gradually the workers came to respect him on account of this and later begantoaskhimn questions about technical matters.I's strategy was not to offertechnicaladvice unless asked.This strategy later led to good relations withthe workers.When, after he became a technical cadre, cadres were sent todo manual labor ·in the workshops, I was not afraid, because he was on goodterms with the workers and also knew he could take the worst there was. Butthe other cadres were afraid.

During this first year, he worked in the combustion (ranshao)  section(gongduan).

There were five people in his smallgroup.I's job was to movethe raw sulphur， crush it, feed it into the vatssand monitor the machinerywhich melted it.

Another worker was responsiblee for monitoring the overalltechnical process--the pipes, gauges, and catalyzing process--where materialswere to be mixed in precise proportions.

Another worker took care of maintaining

Another inspected the ph of the acidthe pipes and storage vats for the acid.and its viscosity.A final worker, a kind of utility man (jidong)， moves aroundthegroup) to do any job that needs to be done ， and fills in for those absent.In addition, there was a group leader, with no fixed duty but he would helpwhoever was busy, and oversaw the entire group work processS.But if he wasin a bad mood, he wouldn't do any work.

This group leader was an old workerand a Party member.

Almost all the group leaders were Party members.Pay, Bonuses:

Informant was paid 46y, which was what first year Univ.graduate technicians got.The group leader was paid 49y. The average workergot 33y.  Bonuses were given to those small groups in the sections whichwere successful in the labor competitions held each month.  The bonuseswere divided into three grades:

1) 25Y; 2) 12Y; 3) 5Y.The winning groupswouldgather workerstogethertomeetanddecedewhogot whatgradeof bonus.It was suggested at one of these meetings that'I get the highest grade (25Y)since he had the most difficult work.But on this occassion I figured thatsince he already got 46y a month and was a freshly graduated student, if hegot this high of a bonus it would lead to later conflicts with the other workers.So he declined the high bonus and suggested that they alll get an equal bonus,which is what they eventually did.To prevent conflicts over bonuses, thisis often what happened--workers would suggest equal ones. In his group it was

-2-always like this.But in other groups workers didn't do this and continuallyquarreled over bonuses, or were suppressed bad feelings. After the groupsmade their decision, the shop head had to approve their decision.

Meetings:Before l960, political study was three days a week, with technical study

These meetings were held after the shift.  After l960, specificallyevery monday.after tthe split with the USSR after the 2Oth CPUSSR Congress, they had politicalstudy every day, and no technical study.RFirst came the anti-rightist, thenthe Peng De-huai affair, etc.Right up to 1972 they had political study everyday.}You might think that workers would be too tired to study after a shift,but work in China is not like in Hong Kong.

Workers work much more slowly;because political study is tiresome, and there are continual livelihoodproblems, like not getting enough to eat, and not being able to get enoughof certain kinds of commoaities.

Thissituation of slow work wouldchangeonly during the end of the year, or during the period preceding a major nationalholiday, whenever there was a major push to speed up production to meet targets.This was a thought (sixiang)) problem, brought about by livelihood problems:low wages, few consumer goods, rationed meat, rationed clothing.

I feels thatif there were a way for workers to get more pay and goods if they did workharder, then theyY would certainly do so.(Dec 30, 2.5 hrs)Work Discipline, Work Habits:

Two words to describe the work habits of workers in China:

tuotuo lala(dragging), and daigong(slowdown). The first refers more to work habits,the second to a more conscious effort by workers to express dissatisfaction.I divides the reasons for this into three groups: l)wages 2)livelihood 3)classdesignationsystem.

l) class designation system1 (chushen)--there is discrimination againstpeople of certain class backgrounds, and this affects their enthusiasm forwork.  I suffered from this especially. II used to complain to his wife inprivate (didn't dare say so openly--"If you're class background is good, theneverything else is just fine"(chushen hao,:shenmo dou hao).

And there wasanother popular, more classical allusion to tthis, which roughly translates,"Dragons beget dragons, phoenix begets phoenix, the son of Laozi will bea greatman”（龙王龙,风生风,老子英雄儿好汉)。

Concretely, this meant that those of bad class backgrounds couldn't goto conferences, participate in armed militia training (onlyintheordinary，basic militia).They were discriminated against in collegeeadmission， wageraises, job appointments after graduation from university.

(Take I, for example).Often those of bad class background got placed in jobs that are undesirableand have nothing to do with what they have studied in college (again, take Ias an example--it seems here as if he is relating his personal experience inthe third person).. In job assignments within work groups, they end up doingmost difficult jobs， such as when·I first came to the mine.Thosewithgoodclass background at this time didn't have to go through this year of manuallabor.I also went to the countryside every year starting in l963 until l97l,and wenttwice a year, l5 days each time.

I's personal chushen was of middling status--independent occupations(ziyou zhiye).His father was a shopkeeper.But his problem came from thefact that he had overseas relations, and remittances.

2)livelihood problems: You can't get to listen to good music, and can'tget tape recorders.1I had to listen to Indonesian and Australian radio stationssecretly， and would get into trouble if caught.Every day after work from7-9 pm, and also on Sundays he would listen.1DuringtheCultural RevolutionI was also persecuted for his foreign style of clothes--he was said to have

-3-been propagating capitalist styles of thought through his clothing.The

slit his pants up the sides as punishment--these were peoplepeoplein his factory. He was also criticized in his study group. and his namewas also mentioned and he was criticizedat a mass meeting.

Later in l972, the people in his unit who had cut his pants came upand apologized, saying that it was LinBiao's influence which had caused them

He replied, OK, the past is past. Did he resent them?to do that.

Whatcould he do--one of these peoplee was his shop director.

At that time food was once again in short supply (the other time was theearly 60s--I tells of people getting beri-beri).I went out every dayto buy canned food, and this aroused suspicion of others.They suspectedhim of corruption, but actually I had the money becauee of remittances fromhis family overseas.

3)Wages:

Raiseswere notforthcoming.For example, I's experience. Hegraduated in l960, in September, and went directly to Yunnan where he wasassigned as a technician on probation(jianxi jishuyuan).He was given 46Yand after one year of training on the job, was zhuanzheng, or turned intoa regular technician (zheng jishuyuan), and made 55y.FAfter that, up untilthe time he left in l972, there was no promotion or raisegiven to him,except one he was able to get by subterfuge duringthee chaos of the CulturalRevolution(seebelow).He was a grade l3 technician, with l5 being the lowestgrade for technicians, and grade ll being the lowest engineer, but I is nottoosureabout this.No change in this as long as II worked as a technician.Around the end of l966, while working in a municipal industrial bureau inKunming, I heard about a central document about a wage adjustment from a friendwho was able to read these secret documents.Later during the Cultural Revolution,when I went back to the Auto Repair Plant, he asked for a test--a theory andpractice test--passed it and was given a raise and qualifications as a level6 worker.

His wages went up to 68.8Y, and he was the only one in his plantduring the cultural revolution to get a raise,and was the last person todo so through this testing system which had earlier been abandoned.

Hewent up to the Party secretary, told him he wanted to take the test and geta raise.The Party Secretary hadn't heard about the document, so I told himto go and check.Of course, this was not exactly legal, but due to the chaosof the cultural revolution he was able to pull this off.After all, his comingback to this plant was on his own initiative and was technically illegalanyway,but there was no one enforcing the laws then.

Even though he hadcome to this repair plant, his papers and documents stayed at the MaterialsBureau.Anyway, the Party secretary was quite surprised to find that therewas in fact such a document, and wanted to know how I knew about it. Isaid "a voice from Peking"--you needn't know anything else". This sufficientlyintimidated the Party secretary, who figured that I had a friend high upin the Party in Peking, so the local Party secretary complied.TThis wasthe only raise I got while in China, and it was illegal.

I says that things like this happen all the time in China--peoplebend rules and get favors due to connections(guanxi). In this case itwas his friend in the Party, who leaked the contents of the douument.I used this to his advantage.Master-Apprentice Relations:

I felt the old master workers at the auto repair plant were conservativebecauee they were unwilling to sharetheir skills with inexperienced workers.Whenever a key repair needed to be done, they sent I away to get tea orsomething, then fixed it in his absence.Later I snuck around and lookedfrom behind another truck, and this is how he learned some of his skilss.

-4-Why did these more skilled workers act this way?This is a conservative attitudeleft over from China's feudal past. NMasters don't have education or theoreticalknowledge. So they don't want others to have their skills--they treat themas their owm.Likethe man whosoldafamous recipefor Yunnan Baiyaoandleft out one herb, or like wanting to keep trying for a male child despitethe fact that one already has 7 girls--feudal remnants.1Many of these oldmasters are left over from the KMT days, and remember better times. Manyare fond of wine, and have the younger workers give them their ration tickets.(Jan 3 2.75 hrs)Auto Repair Plant:

There were no worker-managers in the Phosphate Mine, but there weresome after the beginning of the Cultural Revolution in the Auto RepairPlant (I there during 63-4, 68-72).Since it was not a large plant andwas run by the city, they didn't have any formal worker managers untilthen (I seems to know that they were around in different enterprises andindustrial sectors).During the period of the CR when they were buildingthe triple combination (sanjiehe), workers were nominated as worker-mangers.They were promoted to be shop leaders, or were represented on RevolutionaryCommittees.Each faction nominated the leaders of their own factions(who were all workers), and gave them to the PLA representatives, whodiscussed the nominations with the Party Committee members.

The PLA then selected 9 members or so from the plant to sit on therevolutionary committee. There were five members in all on the RC whowere workers.One was the equivalent of a shop director, and others werein charge of products testing (jianyan), processingg(jiagong)，forging (duanya)and supplies and transport (houqin).

The plant had 340 workers in all, one shift, and was administered byKunming City.

During the CR, the names of the various divisions within the enterprisewere changed according to military terminology--this was PLA's idea. TThey setup a revolutionary committee, studied the PLA, and implemented (in name at least)PLA type organization. Changed names, abolished position of kezhang and thesections that corresponded to them, even though the members of the former Kestill did the same work, in the same place (office).The ke were now calledzu (groups).The factory was calledYing (battalion), the shopslian(company),the small groups pai (platoon), and below the small group level were establishedban(squad).. But the actual changes these implied are hard to say, becausethe factory really had no fixed structure, or stable production during l967,1i68, 1969.

There were 3 stages in the CR relatiεe to management power.

l) before January l967, where the situation in the plant was calm.2) after Jan l967, when struggle between factions and power seizuresbegan, no production, all meetings.3) beginning early l970, finally established revolutionary committee

and PLA entered factory.1Production began to revive.Small Group Management:

It was the same in the auto repair plant both before and after theCultural Revolution, except during the CR, there was no management of small

The leaders included the group leader (zheng zuzhang)groups of any sort.the assistant group leader, and the records keeper (jilu yuan).All ofthese are workers, all participate in production, and all are paid by theworker scale.!The jilu yuan is a worker who has had some education, andis responsible for recording each person's daily output.He keeps track ofworker job-code numbers for purpose of quality control later on.

-5-昆明沪车修里厂

（了40 人)(/966 以 前)厂长

- res pasible for enterprse rel2trens

wlofher vnitss xnel xthorihes附厂长- respmsihk+or internz/

plzwt operations财务科i食堂

seww

治针划科

供生产科

安保卫科I)sm. #of

销科+食库试车检

：

menbersL

2)2u Phqualit inspectrcu

myPL3)Plet4)M

prpen

段压车间修理车间

加工车问(30 I 人)

木工

rcpairs sp2re parts一-

金同

金段变速箱

(in Chn2, domi+ hxe引警

底盘

H

Hnew ones) Drv:ded

乡且

且

然且iwh mzm)grups acady ,加spees fie' toole iay

doors, root

capent

且组

prscess.

steeXyinehzssrs

台且

banTchassis&

oftstsfrans missinIn Smalll groups, before the CR they had group meetings each evening from 6-8.On mondays they had business (yewu)meetings, whicn included technical educationcourses, in which I was involved in teaching.1Also includes production problemsdiscussions.  The teaching is simply done by members of technical departmentswho quiz the workers on how do solve certain problems, and who later explainsolutions. All are practical repair problems. On Tuesday, Wednesday, andThursday nights, political study.They read editorials and discussed them.On Friday, shenghuo jiantao, criticism and self-criticism sessions. Duringthe CR and after they had political study every day after work, six days aweek and sometimes on Sundays.  Also, during 1967-72, if there was currentlya campaign of some sort, they would also use shift time for study.(Jan 10, 2.75 hrs)The parts needed by a production group had to be ordered from the stores(cangku)--tools, spare parts for the automobiles,etc. Workers had to fillout a form，and give it tothe shop director for approval.Sometoolswerescarce and everyone wanted to use then,so there was a regular system ofchecking them out of stores.  The form used to get spare parts and toolswas called lingliao dan.

This system did not change during I's stay in Lnieplant, except of course during the Cultural Revolution, when it was neglected.Contract Workers:

Both the phosphate mines and Auto repair plant had temporary and contractworkers.The phosphate mine had from loo-200, and the auto repair plant had7. I says there is no distinction between temporary and contract labor.

Theywere hired when the plant put in arequest to the minicipal bureau whichmanaged them (in the Auto repair plant case, the Kunming Jiaotong Ju). Thenthey would ask Street revolutionary committees to assign workers.Theywere used for abnormal jobs, like construction, and did these jobs exclusivelyin the plant--they did jobs ordinary workers did not do.  In the phosphatemines, they were hired to do the job of breaking up the phosphate-laden rockswith pick-axes.

Temporary workers had a chance to turn into permanent workers, butfirst the plant had to get permission of the provincial industrial bureau(ting--the mines were provincially administered), and then they could makethe formal change to permanent status.?This happened rarely, and only withthe best workers who had good relations with others in the plant.

The wages for temporary workers are figured by the day. At the mine,they made about 34Y if worked every day (a grade l worker made 37y). At theauto repair plant, temporary workers got about 28y.

Temporary workers do not get any of the supplements and insurance benefitsaccorded to formal workers.Formal workersget sick leavewhichtheyoftenuse just do get a day off. They pretend illness--purposefully burn theirhand with acid, put chicken blood in their urine sample, etc.[Workersoftendid this when they were unhappy on the job.Technical Workers:

There is no such thing as a separate scale for technical workers in China.So-called technical workers--those with skills--are paid on the 8 grade scalelike all other permanent workers. Jobs, further, are not divided up so clearlyin China as they are in H.K.iIn Hong Kong, if you are a certain type of worker,you can do only that type of work.In China you can be transferred to anykind of work or to another shop if needed.

-6-Plant Directors;

Phosphate Mines:The director was a former PLA soldier from the war forliberation, and a Party member.He had no skills， and his job was to promoterevolution and production.  He leads by holding meetings, and presenting tasksto the various departments--planning, production, materials, etc.He does noneof this work himself--he is more of a coordinator. After the departments havecompleted their tasks, they provide reporte to the director. The departmentsare where the trained specialists work.  Originally, the posts of Party secretaryand plant director were separate ones, but over time the two roles have beenmerged in all but the biggest plants.  Plant directors otherwise must alwayslisten to the Party secretary's orders.

Auto Repair Plant: The plant director was a Party member, but was alsopreviously a laoban of a small repair shop for trucks during the KMT periodin Kunming.Various department heads were also from the PLA pre-liberationdays.They were political cadres, like the director, with no specializedknowledge, although they could after several years aquire thorough knowledgeof the plant's operations and problems.  These people got these kinds ofjobs often because they were old, or their health was poor and needed adesk job. They exercised leadership over the specialists in their departments;but did not do the actual work of the departments which required specialisedtraining.These old PLA cadres had many special privileges and positions.Cadre Privileges:

Party cadres in the repair plant got three catties of meat for everyration ticket that specified one catty.This was just done by the peoplethat worked in the canteen.

Cadres also used their knowledge of the industrial·systemtofindout aboutjobopenings in other factories andsecure jobsfor their children, avoiding for them the fate of being sent down to thecountryside.Quotas, Wages:

In the phosphorous mines, the plant used white flags on wall postersto shame workers who did not meet their quotas, while model workers had redflags pasted next to their names.This was done continuously， names for allthe workers being posted in a central place in the plant.  A kind of systemof modelsandanti-models.

Despite all of I's job changes over the ten year period, from mine toplanning section to industrial bureau, and back to auto repair, the onlychange in his wages was during the CR when he managed to get a raise bybecoming a grade 6 worker, where previously he had been a grade l3 technician.This implied a raise from 55Y to 62.7Y.Regardless of job changes, or theraise (or lowering) of status implied (ie. to shop floor, or bureau office),there was no change in I's wages.TThis situation is common in China--people'swages are tied to their persons, not their jobs.Cultural Revolution:

At the beginning of the Cultural Revolution, I was still in the MaterialsBureau of the municipal government.BEarly in 1966 his study group had criticismsessions of Wu Han's play on Hai Jui every night. At that time he went home toeat at 6. and then went back to his unit at 8 for two hours of study.Laterwall posters were written criticizing the play.

Shortly thereafter I was criticized because he had been in the countryfor over l8 years but had never joined the CYL or the Party.So he was calledpolitically backward. He also had overseas family ties, which made thingsworse. So for a while he was criticized for 8 hours a day in study meetings--this went on for a couple of weeks. In the meantime the Bureau staff had

-7-ceased to work, and engaged in revolution full time.This, along withthe criticisms of I, took place over a period of months.The transportation

the Bureau's work on materials suppliesnetwork, on whichdepended, had already been disrupted by travelling students.Two youngParty members in the bureau led the criticisms of various members--at thistime there still were no factions.

Later factions appeared

aand people began to go after the sectionleader, the bureau chief, and the 'white experts'. I was criticized atthe time as a "stinking intellectual" (choulaojiu). He was criticizedcontinually for three months until mid-66. A steel plate was hung fromhis neck which weighed about 25 kilos, and on it was written an epithetwhich read "monster and demon" (niuguisheshen). jLater he was led aroundwithin the bureau. on display, and once around the streets of Kunming.During this period he was made to walk around the bureau offices eight hours

slowed down was prodded by those who were supervisinga day, and if hehim to go faster.He was never beaten, although others were.

In l967, the direction of the movement changed.

They began criticisms

Then he became activeonly of the bureau director and assistant directors.in leading criticisms of the top leaders, in part to redress the wrongshe felt he had received earlier in the movement.But he argued againstdoing humiliating things to the people criticized (placing a cap on thierheads, making them parade around with placards hanging from their necks), andalso challenged these erstwhile red guards about the unfair treatmentthese same people had earlier accorded him.He reminded them that theParty's policy was not to attack average people, just the leaders.

Later I organized a group--the 'struggle team' (zhandou dui)--to leadcriticisms of bureau leaders.He was a real activist, and spurred otherstoforward criticisms within his bureau.

Later， all the bureaus in themunicipal government had such groups, and they joined together into an overallorganization for government administrative staff.TThis became one of twofactions among the government workers.  I became the leader of propagandaactivities for this group. held an official position.

Why did I join the group and become an activist??If he did not activelytake part and make criticisms of others, he felt he could not right the wrongshe suffered previously in the movement. He just couldn't complain throughwallposters--they wouldn't accept and believe this.So he actively joinedthe movement and stressed that the problem lay not among the staff likehimself but among theeleaders.

Others joined the groups because they wanted to keep within the flow ofcurrent political tides.Most staff felt that they should join in order toavoid being targets of criticism themselves.  I felt that this was a generaltactic, which workers also did in the auto repair plant.FPeople joinedgroups in order to prevent being criticized.

After an incident of physical struggle with other factions and a stintof brief imprisonment by his rivals, I was released by tthe other faction andhe decidedit was time toget out ofthebureau.

So he went directly, without

Therehewasassignedpermission, straight backtohisoldautorepair plant.to manual labor--this was September 1967. When I made this move, he presentedit in a wall poster at the bureau, and to the people at the auto repairplant, as a desire to engage in manual labor.The factions at the autoplant bought it.

When he returned to the plant, thing's weren't too severe.There weretwo factions, but still no fighting in the factory. no physical struggle.Work continued, but there were many meetings and debates.TThese were meetingsof factions, not the meetings formerly mandated by the administrative structure.

-8-I decided at this point not to participate. He knew he had a bad chushenbecause he had overseas connections, so he was unlucky.  He also knewthat physical combat was certain to break out at some point, so he decidedit would be wiser not to participate.

The provincial revolutionary committee was established in l970(Aug), andthenthemunicipalrevolutionarycommittee wasestablishedlater that year inOctober.The revolutionary committee in the plant was not established untilthe first days of l97l.

In the meantime, there was not much fighting within the factory from 1967-70.At one point in 1970)(March-June)， one faction left the plant completely tojoin: with others in outside coalitions.

During this period, the factional leaders ran the repair plant.(Onefactinn, the larger one, seized power.The leaders of this faction thendecided when and how to do things.1If a request for a truck repair came fromanother unit, the faction leader would first call on the phone to check thatthe senders were from a similarly inclined or allied faction before theywould agree to repairs.The large faction had about 2o0 members, thesmaller one (which withdrew from the plant for a while) had 80. At thistime, the plant director was working in repair shops, but was asked atvarious times to help solve problems. He was asked for advice by botn wcrkersand faction leaders.

The same was theecasefortheasst.directorsandsectionheads.Theyall were doing manual labor in the workshops.TThestaffofthevariousdepartments still did office work, but reported instead to faction leaderswhen their jobs were completed.1Faction leaders ran the entire operation,but didn't care much about production.The state, further, did not expectthe plant to make a profit, since nobody was running things at the municipalbureaus either (as I's earlier experience attests).During this three yearperiod, the plant repaired about 3 to 5 trucks a month, whereas before theCR they had fixed at least 7o per mnnth.

The Party organization had no activities during this period.TThey,like the administrative cadres, were doing manual labor in the shops.Theydid not participate in the movement apart from writing a few wall posters.But the worst treatment was reserved for the former Party secretaries.

Theydid manual labor during the day, and for one year during this period werekeptinn a 'cowshed' (niupeng). AAt night they were locked in this room in theplant, and duiing this time they were allowed no visitors.These 2 partysecretaries--the plant first party secretary and vise-secretary--startedtheir shift at 8.1But they had to be outside the plant gates at 7am, withheads bowed and repeating apologetic phrases to the workers as they passedthrough--like the following, which roughly translates:"r have erred, andshould die l0,0o0 deaths.I ask punishment from chairman Mao.1I askpunishmentfrom therevolutionaryrebels"（我有罪.罪该万死.向毛主席请界内造反派请罪

). Some workers would laugh, slap them several timesacross their bowed heads, curse, and tease them. Others would whispersecretly that they thought this was too extreme, but they were afraid to beopenly nice to these men.The same kind of humiliating ritual was repeatedin the canteen at lunch. The secretaries knelt at the' head of the room andrepeated the same phrases, heads bowed, and only after the workers werefinished eating did they get their food.These men went through this forI' years.(Jan 14, 2.5 hrs)

Duringg the CR there was generally poor work discipline among thoseworkerswhoremained in the plant and worked. If the shop director wasn'taround，thee workers generally put down their tools and took a smoke.

Whenthey worked, they worked very leisurely.

-9-FormationoftheRevolutionaryCommitteeShortly after the central directive to unite the factions, 3 unarmed PLArepresentatives came to the plant.This was at the end of l970? At first,they just went around the shops and offices asking people about the factionalsituation in the plant, but didn't do anything concrete.They talked notto the leaders of the factions, but to the original leaders of the plant,and also talked to workers during rest periods.

After political study meetingsthe PLA would ask old workers to stay afterwards and discuss the situationin the plant, and find out the points of disagreement among workers.

After this, they sought out the 2 factional leaders to discuss things.They also talked with the old plant directors, the section heads, and otherleading cadres.They held a meeting with all old cadres and with factionalleaders.They discussed how to make an alliance, and who would sit on theRevolutionary Committee.These people raised nominations, and discussed them.But the PLA was firmly in command over the entire process.

While all this was going on, the PLA was also leadiny the rebuilding ofthe PartyCommittee.The discussions to reestablish the party committee werecarried on in secret, with only party members attending(only some were werkers).Party committee was established before the revolutionarycommittee.Thetwo old Party secretaries, who had been held prisoner in the cowshea, attendedthesemeetingsandwererestoredtopositionsof power.Thus the rebuildingprocess for both committees were carried on simultaneously, with the Partycommittee being finalized first.

Composition of the RC:The PLA asked people to join

and in the lastanalysis decided who would be a member, after discussions.

Workersdidnotparticipate in this process, except when they chatted with PLA representativeson the shop floor (but only some had a chance to do so).(Many workers inthe plant were not really interested in the CR, even1 though almost everyone

In I's estimation, only7about40%werereallywas aligned with a faction.interestedinwhat wasgoingon.All joined，of course--no choice.Butwhenever they had a chance, when no one was around the plant that day, theseworkerswoulda run off to their homes. 1Most found the.CR of no interest).

The PLA reps. then made out a name sheet and pasted in on the plant wall,and had the whole plant study and discuss it.Then they pasted up notes madeduring the discussions.Nobody opposed their nominations anyway--no one dared.There were ll members of the RC in all:  3 PLA reps, 3 leaders from each faction,and 2 old PartycadresS (one of whom was the unfortunate cowshed cadre).

Within the revolutionary committee was a five member standingcommittee(changwuweiyuan hui .) which included l PLA representative, who)was the chairman of the

committee and acted as plant director，and who also was the new first Partysecretary and chairman of the Party committee, one vice-chairman, who wasthe former partyI secretary (and a cowshed hostage), and who was the newParty committee vice-secretary, and 3 standing members(changwei)，one fwhom was a PLA representative and 2 faction leaders, one from each.

Thisgroup directed production in general from day to day.

The faction leaderswere regular workers, except:they weretheones whohadtheguts tospeakup and fight.(see attached diagram).The RC itself, the larger body ofll, met only irregularly, and often went over a month without meeting.. Theyonly met if an important problem occurred, or if an important decision hadto be decided.

The plant authority structure changed something like this:

the posts ;ofkezhang and plant director were abolished, and the leaders of the ke becamepart ofFtheregularstaffoftheirdepartments.The standing committee of theRC led these staff offices directly.Whenever a problem occurred or wheneverthey wanted something done, they went to the section office and discussed itwiththem.No responsibility system, just a system of informal communication.

-10-

The PLA representatives were all members of the Party Ctte, and thePLA rep who was chairman of the Rc was also the first party secretary ·There was no fixed term of office for the standing committee or therevol. ctte. as a whole.

There was no office for the standing committee.The members justmade a tour of the plant every day, talked with the workers before theshift.The chairman of the standing committee， of course, had his ownoffice in the Party Ctte. offices.

Of the two old party cadress described above:  tthe former firstparty secretarybecame theeassistantheadofthestandingcommitteeoftheRC, also became vice-party secretary.The other party secretary, whilestill doing manual labor as a crane operator in the disassembling oftrucks (he lifted off the cabs)， was still consulted on a number ofquestions.  FHe understood the entire production process, so he also acted asa diaoduyuan--a coordinator of the entire work process. He made surethe right number of trucks were entered into the repair shops, and thatthe rest were finished before the new ones were disassembled.  This isa pretty complex job, and I says thissman was smart.He was an oldParty cadre--no theoretical or expert knowledge, but a long period ofpractical experience in the plant and he knew the specifics of theplants operations.

After the RC was established, the production situation got better.They still didn't reach the pre-CR production levels of 70-lo0 repairedtrucks a month.Still onlyabout6oper month.They were very busy during7l-72. There were many PLA orders, mostly trucks from Vietnam to berepaired..

Why wasn't production fully restored? Because people's thought (sixiang)had not yet stabilized (anding).

Food supplies were still poor.Therestill was an awful lot of political study each day, and a lot of criticismsessions, and a very strict political atmosphere.Things were still prettytense.Also， Ssince wages had not been raised for a long time, workerswere becoming very lazy.Whenever they had a chance, they put down theirtools and took a smoke.They promoted advanced workers--but no one else.But even if you were selected an advanced worker, it was no use--theystill didn't give you anything but a piece of paper.Nobody was interested.

Even after the CR, there were still gaps between the factions (atleast up till 72).Example:one of the faction leaders was a shop director.He liked to get drunk， and often took trucks out for 'test drives' to getdrunk. But other workers in the shop who were from another faction wereangry about this, but. didn't dare speak because he held power.

These new shop directors were activistss or leaders in onefaction oranother.The old shop directors went to do manual work, or helped new shopdirectors((now called lianzhang)manage the shop.

The old directors hadno formal title, and at times still worked in the office as a helper.

Butif they did this, they still did at least one day of manual labor per week.

The two factions each had accused one another of being capitalistroaders (zouzi pai). One group wanted to protect the old leaders (thebaohuang_pai), and the other wanted them criticized and removed (zaofan pai).The conservatives tended to be older workers.The radicals tended to beyounger.But there was not clear occupational difference between thetwo groups as far as I could tell.This goes for temporary and contractworkers too--they didn't tend to joinr one faction or another.

The differenceis age, and I says this is because the older ones have families, wives, andhave to think about their security. The older, conservative workers tended

-11-to think that if there was a mass movement，many errors would certainlyresult.This is because in such a movement it is very difficult to tellwho really had made mistakes worthy of criticism.

Political study during this period:  The group leader would begin themeeting by yelling orders:

"Greet the great Chairman Mao!"  Everyone jumpedup, bowed to Mao's portrait hanging on the wall and chanted "Long liveChairman Mao!"  3 times in succession.They then turned to the appointedpage in the little red book and read aloud Mao's quotations.?Theyalsohad a special dance (zhong zi wu)--a 'loyalty to Mao' dance, which theydid after study or during breaks mid-day.  I hated this, and tried wheneverpossible to escape by hiding under a truck and smoking a cigarette.

The PLA representatives were still in control of the plant when Ileft in l972.

-12-

厂革分委真常委员 (五个人)

③常委任

①副主任表

①晕化表

党委付书记委第一书记（以前党书记)②两派化表

付警()长"()长革委委：①军代表

④派代表（每派2）

①原来干部(原来的副书记和副厂长)①主维

军代表尝委第一书记管()长

描述：

