id: 066c0ebde0
标题：Concerning Open Propaganda About the Redressing of the Unjust Case of Comrade Liu Shaoqi
日期：1980-2-25
是否是时间段：false
作者：中共中央宣传部
来源：《宣传动态》编辑部, 宣传动态选编 1980, 52-54
标签：文章
书籍：Concerning Open Propaganda About the Redressing of the Unjust Case of Comrade Liu Shaoqi
书籍作者：中共中央宣传部

正文：
# Concerning Open Propaganda About the Redressing of the Unjust Case of Comrade Liu Shaoqi

A formal resolution to redress the unjust case of Comrade Liu Shaoqi will be made by the Fifth Plenum of the Eleventh Central Committee and will be announced in its communique. This is an event of major domestic and international political impact, and we must absolutely do a good job of dealing with it in our open propaganda.

1. Until the communique of the Fifth Plenum has been made public newspapers and magazines should refrain from attempting to be the first to publish news, articles, photographs, or other materials about comrade Shaoqi’s rehabilitation.

2. Eventually, a series of articles, based on the Center’s resolution to rehabilitate and the relevant historical reinvestigation materials (not to be openly published), will be put together and published in a uniform fashion. They will illustrate how comrade Shaoqi’s alleged "arrest and defection" in Changsha, his alleged “treacherous activities" in Wuhan and Lushan, and his alleged “arrest and defection" in Shenyang, etc., are all totally unfounded frame-ups. The three great crimes imposed on him, of “renegade, hidden traitor, and scab,” will be thoroughly overturned.

3. A series of articles must be put together to clarify what’s right and wrong about some of the major issues touched upon in past erroneous criticism, such as the so-called “Liu Shaoqi’s counter-revolutionary revisionist line” and the “black cultivation,” etc. Once the communique has been made public, these should be published one after the other.

We must make full use of this opportunity to further propagate the development of the Party’s ideological line of seeking the truth from facts.

4. Articles in memory of comrade Shaoqi may be published prior to and after his memorial service. We should emphasize quality, not quantity. The stories they present should conform to the contents of the rehabilitation resolution and the memorial address, and they should emphasize the revolutionary achievements of comrade Shaoqi and not describe in great detail the circumstances of how he was persecuted. Be careful not to counterpose comrade Liu Shaoqi and Chairman Mao. As far as the reasons that this major unjust case came about, you may follow the contents of the resolution and not dissect things in too much detail, although nor should you simply refer it all to Lin Biao and the "Gang of Four.”

5. Appropriate arrangements must be made. Overall plans must be made for the arrangement of propaganda concerning all aspects of the Fifth Plenum, from the rehabilitation of comrade Shaoqi to the revision of the Party statutes and the adoption of the norms for the political life inside the Party.

6. Important articles about the rehabilitation of comrade Shaoqi and important commemorative articles to be published by central propaganda units must be submitted for censorship to the Central Propaganda Department; propaganda units in the provinces, municipalities, and autonomous regions should send their articles to the standing committees of the provincial, municipal, and autonomous regional Party Committees for censorship.

7. The propaganda sections of the Party Committees at the various levels and press units should pay attention to the timely gathering of responses to the rehabilitation and pass them on to higher levels.

Translated by Michael Schoenhals

描述：

