id: 68529022a6
标题：Hong Kong Interviews: Informant No. 43
日期：1980-5-23
是否是时间段：false
作者：Andrew G. Walder
来源：
标签：文章
书籍：Hong Kong Interviews: Informant No. 43
书籍作者：Andrew G. Walder

正文：
INFORMANT NO.43PERSONALDATA

Sex: MaleAge:37Education:

middle school graduateTotal Years Relevant Experience:

5

Year Left China:1973Last Year of Relevant Experience: 1971

Illegal (overland at Shenzhen)Initial Immigration Status:

Canton native/os ties unknownNative Place/Overseas Connections:

CapitalistClass Background/Political Designation:

OCCUPATIONALHISTORYSUMMARYPositions Held:l) Research worker, Electronics Research Institute, Canton,

1967-71Administrative Level of Work Unit/(No. of employees):

1) Municipal/ (80)APPOINTMENTS:  1

TOTAL HOURS:2

PAGES TEXT

2No. 43Occupational History

(5/23/80, 2 hrs.)

The informant graduated from upper middle school in 1962, and hada spotty career as a teacher, a staff worker in a taxation bureau underthe finance bureau of Canton, and finally as a member of a research institute.He is now 37 years old. He changed jobs so frequently because he did not feelvery happy living in China.He says he had a 'thought' (sixiang) problemwhich made it impossible for him to be happy. He had a capitalist classbackground. His father was a capitalist.SSoheoftenleftjobsvoluntarilybecause he didn't feel right in his heart. He was unemployed for a whileafter quitting his first two jobs, then in l967 he was sent to anindustrial research institute .  He worked there until l97o when he wassent down to a rural village.He came to Hong Kong illegally after 4 un-successful tries in l973.  He came across at Shenzhen.

The research institute he worked in from l967-70 was under theCanton Municipal Light Industry Bureau.It did research on semi-conductorsand the electrical properties of metals and alloys.They had no factoryconnected with the institute, but they had fixed relations with a numberof radiofactories in the bureau.

He says he was unhappy because people with capitalist backgrounds are'cheated' (qisi) at every turn--in job assignments, in university entrance,in wages.Things were made very difficult for them.  Also, he pointsout, "opportunities for manual labor were just excellent".They were, hesays, the objects of each political movement in every unit they were in.During the CR, all the things in their Canton home were taken away by RedGuards.The Cultural Revolution in the Institute

They had about 8o employees in the institute, divided into many groups

When he first came to the institute,foreexperimental work, divided by topic.he was sent to study with the technicains who taught him the basics of labor-atoryy technique.  Mostofwhattheyhadtodowastomakealloyswithdifferent

He worked in a laboratory,metals, purifying the metals to a certain percentage.and the lab had very stricit controls on entering and leaving, and on one'sdress.  It was air-conditioned.TThey had to wear lab coats and special shoes.He was a laboratory worker, and was paid the basic starting wage, 36. He saysthere were no wage grades.

He didn't really do much work during this period.sSoonafterhegottotheinstitutetheculturalrevolutionhadstarted.SSince he had a capitalistchushenhe was forcedtosweepthefloors.He wasn't allowed to speak directlyto people， or to look into their eyes when he spoke with them.If someonecame by they could push or slap himn and say, "rhat floor's not clean yet!"They were like the 'untouchables' (jian min) he hears they have in India.Thiss went on for almost two years.

There were two engineers, and both had been capitalists.Their treatment

They were put into cowsheds, forced to write confessions andwasevenworse.self-examinations.They were dragged out periodically to be struggled.TTheyknelt down, were denounced, their heads were pushed down, they were kicked,beaten, and cursed duringthesestrugglesessions.He says this was nothingspecial,just an everyday occurence during this period.

The institute was in the same building as the light industry bureau offices.The movement in the bureau was even more severe. they had two factions, and alsowent after all the capitalists there. They used large wooden staves to beat

-1-them there.  They beat some of them pretty badly.  The two factions influencedthe bureau and also spilled over to their institute.After a while one factionwas defeated. In the process the institute director (suozhang)， who wasa grade l3 administrative cadre, was removed from office.Theystopped researchwork entirely for almost 2 years, until l969. Then the whole staff went toHua Xian, a village outside of Canton, for a study group (xuexi ban). Theystudied Mao Thought and quotations. This was over half a year. After thatthey returned to the institute.

When they got back in 1969, they were saying there were too many peoplein the institute, and not enough work, so they sent dow a large number ofstaff to work in a factory which produced radio speakers. It was a smallfactory, about 100-200 employees.Itwasunderthebureau.Heworkedasaworker in the shops, stamping out parts according to a pattern.  He workedin a small group of 5-6 people.The group leader didn't have any specialresponsibilities, he just relayed orders and attended leadership meetingsat the shop that workers could not attend.He also held one or two productionmeetings a week.  They also had a vice group head, who had no special powers.There was no quality inspector.  In the production meetings the leader didn'treally hold discussions very often--he  just told what the output level hadbeen, and what the situation was in quality of articles, waste of materials,and how many not up to standard articles there had been.

After about a year, he asked to be sent to the countryside, becausehe was planning to go to Hong Kong.  At first they refused, he be prevailedand later they permitted him to go.In l97l or so he was sent to the country-side, then in l973 after several attempts, he finally made it to Hong Kong.

-2一

描述：

