id: a515593786
标题：Hong Kong Interviews: Informant No. 52
日期：1980-6-4,1980-6-8
是否是时间段：false
作者：Andrew G. Walder
来源：
标签：文章
书籍：Hong Kong Interviews: Informant No. 52
书籍作者：Andrew G. Walder

正文：
INFORMANT NO. 52

PERSONALDATAAge:25

Sex:MaleEducation:

Upper middle school graduateTotal Years Relevant Experience:

6Last Year of Relevant Experience: l979

YearLeftChina:1979Initial Immigration Status:LegalNative Place/Overseas Connections:

Guangdong native/os ties unknownClass Background/Political Designation:

unknown

OCCUPATIONAL HISTORY SUMMARYPositions Held: l) Technical worker, Engine Parts Factory, Guangdong,

1974-76

2) Teacher, Industrial School, Nanhai, 1977-79Administrative Level of Work Unit/(No. of employees):

1) County/(300)2) County

TOTAL HOURS:

PAGES TEXT:APPOINTMENTS:2

3No.52Occupational History (6/4/80, 1 hr.)

The informant is 25 years old, from Nanhai, a town near Canton. Hegraduated frpm upper middle school and was assigned to a factory which madeparts for internal combustion engines. The engines were usedin the assembly

The plant he worked in was a small branch factory in Nanhai,of tractors.part of a series of branch factories which served a larger general plantwhich made tractors in another city.The plant was under county adminis-tration, was state owned, and had about 3oo employees.

He was assigned to work at this plant in mid-l974. He was a technicalworker (jigong).He worked at this engine parts plant for 4 years. Thenhe was assigned to teach at an agricultural machinery industrial schoolin the town.

This was run bythe provincial education bureau.  They selectedcertainskilledworkerstobeeteachersthereanditwasasoughtafterposition.They taught skillss to untrained workers.1Many people triedto use all kinds of connections to get these appointments. He was justlucky.He used to copy documents for the leadingJ cadre of his plant, andtherefore the leader hada good impression of hisandrespectedhiseducationlevel.So when time came for the plant to sent a worker to the industrialschool, he was selected by this leader.

He taught at this school from 1976-79, and came to Hong Kong legally inmid-1979.Wages

(6/8/80, 2 hrs.)

When he first started as an apprentice, he made l8￥ for the firstyear, 20￥ the second, and 22¥ the third. There was also a clothing supplement.This wasfor a level 2 standardof livingarea.After that， grade1 was 34.7¥.This was not the only way one could enter the labor force as a worker. It wasalso possible to be a 'trial worker' (shiyong gong), which was 28. Then afterone year you would be a grade one worker.Whether you were an apprentice ora trial worker depended completely on luck.Some of his schoolmates weretrial workers.Some were apprentices like himself. There were many docu-ments on labor and he just assumes that at one point there was a documentpermitting this.

Apprentices can not usually be fired, except for very serious mistakes,while trial workers can be fired a little easier during the first year.Apprentices and trial workers both had masters they studied under.Therewere no tests for either， of any sort.Promotion was automatic and basedcompletely on years of service.

After one year of being a grade l worker, you were automaticallyraised to grade 2, 40¥.1After that, you had to pray to heaven and hope fora central document to come aown ordering a wage readjustment.He was trans-fered to teach at the industrial school right after he was made grade l, butwages didn't change as a result of the work transfer.1He also was promotedultimately to gradee2.1In l978 there was a readjustment which dependedlargely on years of service. He was too young to be affected by it.Temporary and Contract Workers

They had temporary workers who came from the communes.They did nothave fixed contracts normally. but some did who signed long term contractsfor hauling and transport of goods.They normally did cleaning, movingthings that required no skill.There were also seasonal workers (jijie gong)in the sugar factories who came for fixed short term periods each year.If these temporary and seasonal workers were good, they could be made a

This was the most common waypermanent worker.This happened frequently.

-1-for people in the villages to get a job in towm.They could move into thetown if it was convenient.  The temporary workers were normally paid inpiece rates.1 If they worked real hard, they could make over loo¥ in amonth.They were paid by the load if they were hauling.1If the worker'swage was fixed at a monthly rate, then they would get slightly more than

But they got no fringe benefits, like hospitalization,the average worker.medicine fees, paid sick leave, hardship subsidies.

The length of service for these temporary workers ranges from a fewmonths to over lo years. It depends on a lot of things. In theory, temporaryworkers can be. fired on the spot for bad work, but you rarely see it happen.Discipline, Punishment

There is a series of possible punishments. First is criticism.Secondis a warning and self-examination. Third is to suspend for a short period.These last two are recorded on one's file (dang'an) and stay in it forever.If it is a very serious error, like murder, rape, they can be expelled,sent to labor camp, but this is under the legal system's sphere of powers,not the factories.

What kind of things can a worker be fired for in a factory?Most impor-tant is illicit sexual relations(nannu guanxi).Hiswholetimeatworkonly one man was fired, and this was for illicit sex.

If a worker's work is bad, if attendance is poor, they will usuallycriticize in meetings, bring up his name.1If he persists in this behaviorthen they might halt his work temporarily, and have him write a seif-examination.Work Efficiency

There were no bonuses in his plant during his three years there.Worker activism as a result was very low.  They just didn't work very actively.No matter how hard they worked they got the same amount of money. But soonafter he left to teach in l977 they put a bonus system into effect and workeractivism increased immediately.(Of course there always were some laboractivists before, but generally people didn't work hard.  They had selectionsof advanced workers each year, annually, throughout the time he worked there.They would discuss and nominate people in the small groups.The Engine Parts Factory

The enterprise had over 3o0 workers.TThere was a large repair shopthat repaired internal combustion engines, with over 5o workers.Thenthere were the production shops. ?There was one shopfor the repair andrestoration of spare parts.(China is really short on spare parts, so therewas over 30 workers in this shop.?There was a scientific research groupof technicians and assistant technicians. ?There was a parts and productsshop, which included the rest of the plant, which manufactured parts fortractor engines.They had a mess hall in.which only temporary workers wereemployed.

The leading group's name had changed many times during the years,but never really changed in nature. TThe branch party secretary was alwaysin charge. They had a revolutionary committee.The party branch secretarywas the head, and the 2 vice branch secretaries were the vice-heads.  Therest of the RC were all members of the branch party committee, some wereworkers.They also had sections6 (gu) for technical and administrativematters.

The informant worked in the repair shop.  His small group had only3 people, but some groups had lo, it depended on the work. His group re-

-2-paired trucks and tractors. His personal responsibility in the small groupwas the electrical system of the tractor.  Another was responsible for theengine, and another for the drive train and axle. They had a group leader,the one with the highest technical level. He directed the repair of thetrucks and tractors.

Shop directors usually understood production, because they mostly werepromoted from among the experienced workers.  But plant directors (orparty secretaries) didn't understand production at all, they were sent infrom above.

They had a quality inspector in the shop, an old worker who could tellwhat was wrong with.an engine just by listeningg to it. He worked with ayoung guy right out of technical middle school.Meetings

During some periods, they had meetings every night--five nights aweek.For example, when Deng Xiaoping fell from power, they studied thisevery night for several weeks.They also had a campaign to study the theoryof the dictatorship of the proletariat.These were just about the People'sDaily editorials, they did not leave these topics.The campaign had nothingto do with wages.

They also had business meetings occassionally.  About once a month,for the entire plant.Twice a month, they had pre-shift meetings of theshops for half a hour. But this was not fixed, it depended on the number ofproblems that popped up in production. Once every three months, they hadan 'exchange of technical experience' meeting (jishu jiaoliu hui), where someworkers would give demonstrations, and discuss technical problems.Technical Education

They alsohad a couple of kinds of schools for spare time worker educa-tion.The July 2l Worker's College was full time, completely separatedfrom production.  First, one has to apply, then the plant has to approve.Very few workers could participate--about l% would get permission.  Usuallypeople studied 2-3 years depending on their technical level which theystarted with. when they graduated they were considered technicians.Theywere specialized by system--light industry, heavy. textiles. Each bureauwould have one. Their small town of lo,0oo didn't have a July 2l College.When people graduate, they don't necessarily get assigned to their old unit.They can be sent to a new one.

The school he taught at after leaving the factory was run by the localAgricultural Machinery Bureau.Skilled workers from nearby factories wouldteach peasants from the surrounding countryside about the maintenance andrepair of agricultural machinery.The peasants would come in, study for3 months, then return to their villages.

Part-time technical study classes were run either by several plantsin combination or by one large plant independently.  This was just in orderto raise worker skil.l levels.TThese were mostly young workers who partici-pated, few old ones. It was voluntary to participate. FPeoplecommonlytookpart. They met for 2 fixed nights a week. TTheir plant did not have thiskind of spare time education before l977.This was established after theGang of 4 was knocked dowm.  So there was no conflict with nightly politicalstudy classes because after that time there was little political study.

-3-

描述：

