id: 013fd7bf87
标题：Who Sabotaged Military Marriage?
日期：1978-0-0
是否是时间段：false
作者：云南丽江地区中级人民法院
来源：西南政法学院刑法教研室, 冤假错案选编, 84-85
标签：文章
书籍：Who Sabotaged Military Marriage?
书籍作者：云南丽江地区中级人民法院

正文：
# Who Sabotaged Military Marriage?

Hu Wenqing, male, twenty-three years old, Han ethnicity, lower-middle peasant family background, student class status, junior high school education, from the Da’an commune of Yongsheng County in Yunnan, was a teacher at the Da’an elementary school before getting arrested.

The original verdict on the Hu Wenqing case suggested that he had raped the two soldiers’ fiancées, Xiong Meilian and Yang Zhilian, causing the two soldiers to break off the engagements. On January 19, 1977, the Yongsheng County Court sentenced Hu Wenqing to seven years’ imprisonment, but he refused to accept the ruling and lodged an appeal. Reviewed by the Lijiang Intermediate Court: In September 1975, during the process in which Hu was given permanent [employment] status,[1] he was found to have had improper sexual relations with a young woman named Zhang Xingyan, who came from the Zili brigade, and he was given help and education (bangzhu jiaoyu)[2] among teachers. In October 1974, comrade XXX from Da’an commune went to work in the Yongle commune. He summoned the two soldiers’ fiancées, Yang Zhilian and Xiong Meilian, and the young woman Yang Meilian to the brigade, inquiring about whether they had had any improper relations with Hu Wenqing. All three denied the accusations and were detained in the brigade that night. The next morning, the three of them were continuously questioned one after another, but none confessed. Comrade XXX called XXX from the purchase and sales store, brought straw ropes, and said: “Hu Wenqing already admitted to it; if you don’t admit to it, we will tie you up with ropes.” Under coercion, the three of them gave false statements of having had improper sexual relations with Hu and were only then released back home. Comrade XXX also went to Xiong Meilian’s home and took a letter from the soldier [sent] to Xiong. In December, the commune wrote to the soldier seeking his opinions. In January 1976, the soldier filed a charge with the Yongsheng County Court demanding that Hu be dealt with. Yang Zhilian’s fiancée broke off the engagement when he demobilized from the army, got home, and found out that Yang Zhilian was summoned to the brigade and had confessed to improper sexual relations with Hu. At the same time, when Hu was interrogated by the court’s personnel, he was told to kneel and confess. Under coercion, Hu Wenqing made a false confession.

Reviewed by the Intermediate People’s Court of Lijiang District: The judgment of the Yongsheng County Court was revoked, the fact of Hu Wenqing having sabotaged military marriages was rejected, and Hu Wenqing was released.

Selected from the first issue of Reflections on the Situation by the Yunnan Lijiang District Intermediate People’s Court in 1978.

Translated by Min Chen, Stefan Raeder, William Tam, Jianquan Wang

[1] During the Mao-era, there was a shortage of teaching resources in rural areas. Schools sometimes hired temporary teachers who were not officially qualified. If these teachers worked a few years and then met some requirements, they would be given permanent status, thereby entering the official system of evaluation and be designated a corresponding professional rank. This is perhaps what dingji (定级) refers to in the original.

[2] This term referred to a criticism or punishment of sorts, but it was not a formal sanction. It meant to “help and educate” someone to recognize their mistakes and then change or correct behaviors.

描述：

