id: e5e9fb1edc
标题：Hong Kong Interviews: Informant No. 55
日期：1980-6-6,1980-6-9,1980-6-11,1980-6-13,1980-6-16,1980-6-18,1980-6-20,1980-6-23
是否是时间段：false
作者：Andrew G. Walder
来源：
标签：文章
书籍：Hong Kong Interviews: Informant No. 55
书籍作者：Andrew G. Walder

正文：
INFORMANT NO. 55PERSONAL DATA

Sex:MaleAge:60Education:University graduate (Guanghua, pre-l949)Total Years Relevant Experience:30

Year Left China:  1979Last Year of Relevant Experience: l979Initial Immigration Status:Legal

Shanghai native/0s toHong Kong'49,Native Place/Overseas Connections:

return 1950Class Background/Political Designation:  unknown

OCCUPATIONALHISTORYSUMMARYPositions Held: l) Staff member, Finance Department, Municipal Metallurgy

Bureau, Shanghai, 1950-592) Steel Plant, Shanghai, l959-79

a) Department head, Finance Dept. 1959-66b) worker, steel rolling shop, 1967-69c) Staff member, Production Leadership Group, 1969-74

d) Vice-head, Finance Dept., 1975-79Administrative Level of Work Unit/(No. of employees):

2) Municipa1/(5000+)Experience in Full-time Manual Labor (for non-worker occupations):

worker in steel rolling shop, 1967-69

TOTAL HOURS: 16

PAGES TEXT: 22APPOINTMENTS:

8No.55Occupational History(6/6/80, 2 hrs.)

The informant was born in Shanghai in l920, and grew up there.Hegraduated from Guanghua University in Accounting, during the Japaneseoccupation.After the occupation he got a job with an aviation company,CNAC, and he fled with the company to Hong Kong during the battles aroundShanghai between the KMT and CCP in the late 1940s. In 1950, the companymoved back to Shanghai, and he went with it.As soon as the company gotback in China, it was dispersed and he was assigmed to the MunicipalMetallurgy Bureau (yejin bu), in the finance department (caiwu chu).Thebureau managed over lo factories and was divided into 2 sections--one handledcosts (chengben) and the other handled circulating funds:(zijin）.

Hiswork was to read reports from the factories for requests for circulatingfunds and to decide whether or not to approve.In. 1959 he was sent down to

At that time in the middle of the Great Leapa steel plant in the system.Forward they were transfering a lot of personnel down from the bureau tothefactories--to go to thefront line of production to understand conditionsbetter.So heeandmanyothersweresentdown.He stayed in this unit untilNovember 1979.Hewasthe headof the financedepartment of thissteelplant for 20 years.The plant had over 5oo0 workers.

For two years atthe beginning of the cultural revolution, in l967-68, he did full timemanual labor in a steel smelting shop, but was returned to a leadingposition in the department later.Wages

When he first started work in l950, he got 87￥, the lowest possiblewage for a department head (kezhang). In l956, during the wage reform,he was raised to l06¥. In l959, when he moved to the factory, he wasraised to 1l6¥. In l964, he was raised again to 126¥.Afterthathegot no further raises.

He was a middle level cadre, tthe equivalent of between grades ll-l7

But the Shanghai local government didon the state administrative scale.not use this system for industrial administrators.Each job--staff,department heads，plant directors,was dividedinto a handful of grades andthen you moved up or down within these grades.So the department head had5 grade levels, the lowest 87￥, the highest l36¥.  This was for heavy industryin Shanghai.

Wage readjustments:  In 1956 was the wage reform.They set peopleaccording to what they made before the eight grade system was started.Theygave 'retained' (baoliu) wages to those who would have been cut otherwise.But they didn't handle the reform well, they really didn't carry it out inlight industry, or in the joint state-private enterprises.:So later theyhad 'readjustments'.TThefirstreadjustmentt was right after the reform,still during l956, since the original reform had not affected everyone.They just continued to set grades for people.

In l962, there was another readjustment.(Of course，tthey assessedpeople in small groups, and politics was a major criteria.FBut these so-called group assessments were only superficial.The real decisions weremadee by the plant director in consultation with the party!secretary andshop directors.They madee the decision, and had a fixed percentage 1limit.In the small groups it was: the 'backbone elements', the activists, whowere assessed for raises.The decision is really already set, and everybodyin the group knows it.Only four out of lo can succeed, and the activistswill get it, everyone knows.  So the 'discussion' is just for show. It included

-1-all employees except leading cadres.The readjustment in l964 was the sameas the one in l962.

The next readjustment was in l977.They promoted those with low wagespreferentially. They set up year lines and scale levels to which all mustbe raised. In l979, they began another readjustment, and this time itwas based more on contribution and technical ability and skill than onyears of service and politics.  ILeading cadres have their wages increasedat the same time as the rest of the employees, except that the decisionsare made at the bureau.Bonuses

They first had bonuses in l958, in the Great Leap Forward. They gaveone lump sum to workers, completely on their own, at the end of the year,and called it the "Great Leap Forward bonus". Everybody assessed oneanother in their small groups.  The lowest prize was 50-60¥, and thehighest over lo0￥. The was the complete responsibility of the plant,it was not official policy.

In l959, they decided on a monthly bonus system.

Each month they hada small group assessment.They considered politics, attendance, saietyrecords, work attitude, completion of quantity and quality targets.They had a system called "3 grades, 9 levels" (sandeng jiuji). The lowestwas 2¥, the highest 9¥.Then at the end of the year, they would assess againto distribute left over bonus funds.This was called "the l3th bonus".They used the same criteria as the monthly assessments, and the lowest wasaround l3￥, the highest 25¥.There were very few people who didn't get abonus of some sort.The only ones who didn't get any were those who causedmajor accidents.

Whentheculturalrevolutionbegan,theyI criticized the bonus systemsaying "yue ping yue jiang", meaning the more they assessed for bonuses,the worse things got. They wanted to abolish the system.  BBut Shanghainever did, they just changed the name, and called the bonuses 'supplementarywages' (fujia gongzi). There were no more assessments, just an equalwage supplement of 5-6 for every person in the enterprise every month.This was so people would not lose income after the bonuses were abolished.

They restored the system of assessing for monthly bonuses after DengXiaoping came back the second time.The new system was the same as before.When Shanghai switched to the new system they continued to give out the

But beginningin l979duringthe new wage reformsupplementary wages.they said they would give people raises and these would take the place ofthe supplement.If you got a raise of 7¥, they would give you an extra 2¥and consider the supplement abolished and your wage grade one step higher.So they plan gradually to phase out the supplementary wages.

The new bonus system is basically the same as the one they had beforethe CR.They use the same method for assessing for bonuses， and the samefor paying out the money.The money for bonuses comes from profit. Ifthere is no profit, there is no bonus.?They take out funds from profitequal to l3% of the total wage fund for permanent workers.Effectiveness of Bonus Systems

(6/9/80, 2 hrs.)

Even you in America: know that workers didn't even come to work duringthe Cultural Revolution, and after they came back to work they didn't reallywork hard. There was also a lot of sick leave. Now workers don't ask forsick leave as much. If they are absent for over 5 days, there is no bonus,even though those over 8 years seniority get full paid sick leave. Nowworkers work about the same as they did before the CR.

-2-

They criticized bonuses during the CR for causing arguments, destroyingworker unity, and creating contradictions among the working class.Hesays that of course there were contradictions, it would not be objective tosay there were none.People who didn't get bonuses naturally were upset,and argued. But the problem wasn't that severe. The Gang of Four justused this contradiction. Now when they assess for bonuses there is verylittle arguing.Punishments, Discipline

If you come late to work there is no punishment, but in his plant noone came in late.They had discussion meetings6(pengtou hui) every dayone half hour before the shift, so they all had to be there and no onewas late. If a worker's work was not good, they call a 'democratic lifemeeting'(minzhu shenghuo hui) in the smalll group. This includes criticismand self-criticism, and includes giving of advice by others.If thisdoes not work, the shop director (always a party member) or the branchparty secretary will talk with him.Things are usually solved at thisstage.

There is basically no expulsion for poor work in China.1For stealing,counter-revolutionary activities, large scale corruption, they have thepublic security bureau. After they take you away for labor reform this isnot an expulsion by the factory.1For bad work, the treatment is education.No one was ever expelled by the factory leadership for bad work.Temporary andContract Workers

They did not hire temporary or contract workers .in their steel plant.They did hire seasonal worker (jijie gong) during the summer to add to thehigh-temperature shops so the regular workers could take rests outsideregularly.So they would rotate workers faster in the summer, and usedthe seasonal workers for this.

These seasonal workers came from the communes in the Shanghai suburbs.If they needed a certain number of workers, they would notify the metallurgybureau, which would notify the labor bureau.  These bureaus are all underthe Shanghai municipal government.The seasonal workers live in the plant,and stay in the city during the period they are working. They have athree shift system.

All the wages are given to their communes, and the communes in turn give

But the communes alsogive them some cashfor eatingthem work points.and living in the city, so the method had advantages for the seasonalworkers over his friends back in the commune.The money is paid directlyto the commune, and comes not from the fixed funds for wages， but fromcirculating funds, and is added in as costs under the title 'seasonal workers'.They had no temporary workers which came from the residents committees in thecities.?This was true from 1957-79 and there was no change, not even duringthe cultural revolution.Finance Department of theMetallurgy Bureau

The purpose of the Finance Department of the bureau was to distributethe state's funds to the factories and make sure it is used in the mostefficient ways.Theywant toquickenthe rateof turnover of funds(zhou zhuan).That is their main goal..For example, if in one year theygave them 2o0,ooo¥ to produce X machines, the next year they would tryto get them to produce 2x machines on only 380,0o0￥. If the plant saysthey can't do it with the given amount of funds, they would send theinformant to investigate in the plant.  He would see the plant director

-3-(who doesn't really do any concrete management work anyway), who wouldintroduce him to the vice director who in turn introduces him to thefinance director of the plant with whom he has connections.They discussthe situation, how of save costs, increase turnover. For example, ifthe state supplied liquid funds are too high in one year, the plant willbegin to stockpilee goods, materials, and the next year if funds arereduced, then they1 will have to increase capital turnover and use someof the goods in the warehouse.If the finance department head stillinsiststhefundss are not enough, then the informant would suggesta bank loan if they really needed more funds, at interest of course.Well the enterprise wants free state funds, not a bank loan withinterest, so they usually turn down the loan and go ahead and economize.So generally the job of the finance department of the bureau is to ensuremore rapid turnover of liquid funds.

The bureau had over lo enterprises under them, and one person in thefinance department was assigned to each plant to be responsible forcosts (chengben) 1management, and one was also assigned to each enterpriseto be responsible for funds6(zijin)management.

So each person haa tobe totally responsible for knowing the production situationnandfinancialstatus of their enterprise.Sotheyspent about twodayseachweek atthe enterprises inspecting the warehouses and accounts, making sure theydon't stockpile too many goods, and don't have too few of other suppliesthat might cause a slowdowm of production later.

The responsibilities off the funds managers was to see that they usedas few funds as possible to complete their production responsibilities.Costs, on the other hand, involved making sure that they used the leastpossible amount of materials to produce the targeted amounts of output.

The basic method of

The informant also did costs work for a period.visiting and investigating plants was the same, but they talked withdifferent people in the plant, although the subject of their conversationswasabout: the same.He would talk with the.had of the production departmentabout the use of materials, fuel, and electricity.

They would discuss waysto reduce costs--use less raw material, less fuel and power.1Theirresponsibilities were to visit plants, oversee operations, help theplant leaders, especially the production department head, to reduce costsand raise profits.The people in the enterprise needed theirc assistancebecause they were busy handling concrete work, but the people in thebureau were handling management work.

The plant departments sent monthly, quarterly, and yearly reports to theBureaudepartments.The production department of the bureau receivedreports on output and quality, the labor and wages department got reportson wage expenditures and use of labor and overtime work, and the financedepartment got reports on costs, funds， and profit.

Funds and costs are distinguished as follows.FFunds represent thesituation with expenditures and income based on the money spent forhousing, materials, etc., and income from products sold.Costs repre-sent theaverageefigureforeachtonofsteelproduced--andthetotalcost is based on the power, materials, fuel, labor, and power consumed.

Profit is calculated as follows.You subtract cost per unit steelfrom the selling price set by the state, and that is your profit.SSo youspend l0oo dollars to produce X tons of steel, sell it for l200 dollars,and your profit is 2oo dollars.The state-set profit target is a concrete

theynumber, not a percentage.The target for costs is set as follows:havee'constant price products' (kebi jiage chanpin) for the entire nation.The cost target is set as a percentage in reducing the cost of producing

-4-these selected constant price products.Constant price is an accountingfigure.When they set these targets for costs they set a percentagefor reducing costs in producing the set product.The constant priceproduct is just one of several products that may be produced in a plant.They don't set cost targets for all products, just selected ones.Sothis is a way of competing with advanced units.The state will.selectcertain constant price productss to be the targeted ones and then settargets for costs which is the amount to be reduced.

Funds (zijin)--this is not a target, but just a figure of fundssupplied by the state to a plant.It is calculated by the bureaubased on the amount of products in the output targets.

The bureauhas the responsibility for apportioning state funds to the factoriesunder it.It gets a fixed amount each year, through the bank system,and it distributes the money to factories based on the targets of productionfor each plant.The responsibility for apportioning this money--estimatingand calculating needs--was that of his own bureau finance department.While deciding, plant directors are all called to the bureau for a meeting,and then later, if the plant director thinks of something else, he will comeback to the bureau and talk with their department head individually.Guanxi does not count here.They have a fixed formula for apportioningthe funds, based on output targets.

They can use this because the productsthe factories under their bureau produced are all the same--steel. Oncethe funds are spent, you don't pay them back--they're gone. But all theplant profit goes back to the bureau.Funds Management

(6/11/80, 2 hrs.)Funds are divided into two types.

Circulating funds, and fixed funds.Both are invested by the state.

Fixed funds (guding zijin) are investedin fixed capital and machinery.

These funds are dead (si).1But circulatingfunds are live (huo), they move

around.Fixed funds include machinery

The circulating funds are used to buy materialsand plant buildings.

At the end of the year theparts, electricity, transport, and labor.excess funds over the fixed amount for circulating funds is profit,and that is all remitted to the state.If the production targets areraised for the next year, the plant will be given an increment to itsstock of circulating funds.If theequota decreases,they take away fromplant funds.Circulating funds are constantly circulating through theM-C-M (money-commodities-money) chain.

Losing money (kuiben). TThere are two ways to operate at a loss.The first is 'planned loss' (jihua kuiben).

Articles will be produced ata cost above their state-set selling price, because it is decided to keepthe price of that article low for the next step in the production

Soprocess, meaning the next set of enterprisess in the product chain.each year the state will makeup) the planneddeficit infunds.Thisis planned such that a bureau loses money in1 one plant but makes it inanother, and overall it should balance out.

The second kind iss'unplanned loss'(fei jihua kuiben).Thismostoftenhappens when the state has a plant which it recognizes will not make muchmoney and gives low profit targets to.1If the plant misses by a little,

This influences

This is the fault of the plant management.they lose money.their stock of circulatingg capital， reduces it and it is not enough toproduce the same quota of productss the next year.They have no other recoursebut to borrow from the bank.There is interest on these loans.Butfirsta work team will be dispatched to inspect the plant, usually quality problemsare the cause of losses, because the plant can't sell its products.

Ifa-5-plant contracts to buy goods, and they are not up to quality standards,they can be refused.Management methods is also another cause of losses.After investigating they will find out what is wrong, then tell theplanttoremedyin three months.If they don't turn the situation aroundin 3 months, they will tell themn to stop production.While they stopthey study business and politics both.After l-2 weeks, they start toproduce again.

After this period of education then production should behandled better and they will not lose money.If the problem persists, theytransfer in a new plant director.(China does not have premiums or bonusesfor plant directors.If the problem persists over a long period, theplant might be changed into a planned-loss unit.

Reasons for losses--lack of worker activism, waste articles toohigh (rejected articles), use too much raw materials, bad quality offinished articles causing the contracted buyer to refuse them.

Lossesdid not become more prevalent in the steel industry in the l970s becausesteel is used in everything and there is an unlimited market for it.

Temporarily, the bank will pay out a loan, at interest, to bail outa plant in a funds shortage.

The length of time for repayment depends onthe agreement with the bank.

Under special conditions: a plant can borrowfunds from the bank on a short-term basis to buy a large batch of rawmaterials all at once to fill an especially large order.

These arevery short term.

If funds are lent to a plant because they lost money during a year,and if the plant does not turn the situation around in the next year andcan't repay the debt, then the bank will not lend any more money to itin the future.]It happens.that is a plant doesn't pay back their loanfor a long time and never turns its situation around, then the debt iseventually cancelled.Distribution of Profits

rhere is profit retention.The plant director retains l7-l8% ofprofit for the "plant director's fund" (changzhang jijin). This is theSoviet term.They also called it "profit retention" (lirun ticheng).The plant director keeps this in an account for his discretionary use.He can use it for welfare expenditures for workers, or he can use itfor minor repairs and renovation of machinery and fixed capital stock.It is up）to his discretion.Of this amount, l3% is set aside forworkers'welfare.

There was also profit retention for overfulfilling planned profit.You couldl retain 20% of all profit over the planned amount.?This moneygoes into the plant director's fund.FFive percent of this is set asidefor workers' welfare.This money does not get mixed in with the plant'sregular circulating funds, which is the money the state supplies.

It ismoney you earn yourself.This method has been used as long as he workedin China.The entire system has never changed in any basic way.

He has heard of the experiments with enterprise autonomy, and saysthis is Zhao Ziyang's method.This is a method modeled after Yugoslavia.They have workers'(councils, they elect plant directors. But at the sametime plant directors have more power, and can hire and fire workers.

ASfar as financial matters go, they are increasing the amount of moneya plnt retains from profits,andthey don't place restrictions on how touse it.Up until the end of 1979 they had not used this method in Shanghai.He does not understand much in detail about the content of enterpriseautonomy.

-6-

This enterprise autonomy concept took hold in Sichuan because plantsthere had been disrupted for years since the cultural revolution.?Theyhad sold off capital stock to pay wages, workers had destroyed things.So when Deng came back in power， he and zhao Ziyang started a reform ofthe economic system.They went to Yugoslavia and Romania to study theirmethods, then they gave powers to the enterprises which were formerlyconcentrated in the state.But this method had not spread to Shanghaiby the time he left, late last year.Sichuan is still an experimentalplot.

A clarification on the relation of bonus funds to profits--themoneyfor bonuses is a set part of the wage bill, and is a fixed portionof circulating funds.It does not vary by amount of profit.1If there areto be special bonuses for advanced workers or models, the plant directorsfund is used.This fund does vary by profit.

They used this method bothbefore and after the cultural revolution.

The bonuses recently used in Sichuan, by the Zhao Ziyang method,come from retained excess profits from overfulfiliing profittargets.This money goes to the director's fund and then into the 'overfulfiilmentof norm bonus'(chao e jiang).This is an alternative to the earliermethod.The Zhao Ziyang method is to give the plant a greater shareof its own profits，and to fix the amount of bonus to the amount ofprofit. So the form is the same, but the method is new.TThey havenot used this in Shanghai.Accounting Categories

When calculating costs, they figure in wages for both permanent andnon permanent workers, expenditures for raw materials, and all otherexpenses, which includes water, electricity, repairs, maintenance,oil， coal, gas.

Fixed capital depreciation.

If the state buys a machine at 3o0,00o¥and gives it 30 years as a depreciation period, then each year theplant must figure in lo,ooo¥ under the 'expenses' category.This isentered in the accounts when figuring costs.

A plant has three accounts.Capital (chengben), cash (xianjin),and depreciation funds.Cash is real money.Depreciation funds areaccounting ffigures.On capital accounts, each year the expenditures forlabor, raw materials, and expenses (including depreciation funds of theyear) are placed on the 'credit' side of the capital account. But theamount for the depreciation fund is placed on the 'debit'side of thedepreciation fund account.At the same time, the amount for labor， rawmaterials, power, is placed in the 'debit' side of the cash account.But the amount for depreciation is placed only on the debit side of thedepreciation funds account.sSo when a plant buys a new machine, itsvalue is entered into the credit side of thedepreciation fund account,and as the capital depreciates each year at a fixed percentage, thatfigure is added into costs and put:into the 'debit'ssideofEthedepreciationfund account.At the end of the fixed depreciation period, thee depreciationis no longer added into costs, and the original amount paid for the machineis cleared from the books on the depreciation fund account (see diagram).Profit and Financial Situation over 30 Years

Profit reflects production.The financial situation during the firstfive-year plan was excellent, each year better than the one before, rightup to the beginning of the Great Leap Forward.

During the Great Leap,-7-EINTERPRISE AcCOUWTS

成本科目Db.

C1人H

成原未料折旧

折旧基金Db.Derecizhn Clange

Ongmd V//re of New Mzcbinen)

王贝金Db.

ΛH原 未科production and profit increased at first, although it decreased after 1958.From l960-65 things were not excellent, and not as good as during theGreat Leap Forward.But for l0 years after l966 the state just didn'thave any funds.IDuring the cultural revolution quality went down, workersdidn't go to work, but wages were still paid.They lost money.And forl0 years after that the financial situation was very poor.1DuringtheGreat Leap Forward, the Finance Department of the bureau was not disrupted.It is true that many were transfered to factories, like the informant,but an equal number were sent up to the bureau department from thefactories.  So they did continue their work without disruption.

But the Cultural Revolution was different..All the staff went downfor manual labor.His bureau department normally had over 30 peopleworking in it, but duringgthe cultural revolution they only had4-5leftin the office.Then there was a gradual growth in the number of peopleworking in the department starting at the end of 1977.From l966-77there were only 4-55 people.The rest went to May 7 Cadre Schools.

NOWthe department is at its former size.

All the forms were simplified during the cultural revolutinn period,and reports were shortened.1Many things were just left undone.Workjust wasn't completed.Funds, costs, all these things were in disorder.The financial discipline system was completely destroyed.

There were norules.Plants would spend money they didn't have permission to spend.They would sell off machines for cash.This was also a period when therebegan a lot of large scale back door exchanges of materials and goods andpurchases of parts.These sorts of things are in violation of statefinancial discipline.

This was also a period when a log of firms lost money.

All systemswere destroyed. If they lost money, the state didn't make it up.Theplant wouldfind ways of itsown to solveits moneysituationthroughback door sales of raw materials, machinery. The state just didn'tmanage them.They had to find their own way to complete plans.

During this period few plants remitted profits to the state becausethey were unprofitable.Their accounts were in disarray. Basicallyproduction did not grow unless the state invested and buiit new factoriesor workshops, and the state had less money for this than they did before,also.

After l976, they made a strong effort to restore and adhere to eachand every system in the financial and production sphere.1For example--have workers work a full 8 hours every day, come in on time and workthe entire shift.This was no problem for the older workers because theywere used to this, but the younger workers were not, they were used toa lot of freedom.They closed the back door and cracked down on non-legal purchases also.

During this period they sent work teams to plants to inspect accounts,the production situation, and they transfered plant directors to differentplants.They reorganized"factories thoroughly, and tried to put them backonto the path of following regulations and financial discipline.Thisreorganization work was led by the bureau, and the work teams were madeeupof people taken from the bureau staff.They did not stop production in

They reorganized things as they went along.the plant to reorganize things.Reorganization (zhengdun)includes a):increasing labor discipline, b) prac-ticing economyin materials usage, c) increasing product quality and thusdecreasing the number of waste articles, and d)taking power away from leadersof the cultural revolution era, those from the rebel factions, and giving itback to the old cadres.

-8-

When they took power away from the younger plant leaders, they didn'tdemote them or kick them out, and didn't make them return to the shops.They just took away their powers.

They had position but no power.Theyhave not yet come to the point of kicking them out.The Communist Partyhas a habit of letting cadres go up, but not down.SSo the proportion ofcadres has increased over the years, and there are more of them than thereis work to do.

There are three kinds of cadres.FFirst, those who always were cadresand never stepped aside.  Second, those who were knocked down during thecultural revolution, and who came back.Third, those who were promotedto positions during the CR.

When 1977 came, they took category 3 andmadethemn 'vice heads', and made category two the 'heads' above them.Restrictions on the Use of Plant Funds

(6/13/80, 2 hrs.)

There are basically few restrictions on the use of circulating funds.You could use them for materials, labor, repairs, whatever you wanted.The bureau didn't care.IBut if you wanted to buy new capital equipment,you could not exceed a lo,0oo¥ limit on any single purchase withoutthe bureau finance department permission.

Over that you needed permission,and have to convince the bureau of your need.

But the use of funds is not entirely unrestricted.The bank exercisescurrency management and holds onto money in a single enterprise account.Each time you needcash to make a payment you need to explain its use.The amount you can spend on labor in a given year (permanent labor) isfixed and you can't withdraw over a certain amount, you need special per-mission from the bureau finance department.Payments for materials andother expenses are not made in cash but by check（zhipiao）.But sincewages are withdrawm in cash, they are subject to currency managementregulations.When contracts are fulfilled, checks are used as payment.

The banks generally act as fiscal representatives of the state.They arethere to make sure that proper use is made of funds.It is， of course,possible to use the state's money for your own purposes--for corruption.But this requires several people to cooperate. The only way a financialofficial can get at this money is to write a check for another unit--especiallya commune, preferably someplace elsewhere.Then you have that official inthe unit 'kick back' part of that money after the sale.of the raw materials.These sorts of things cannot be detected at the time.Usually neighborswill see your standard of living suddenly rise and then suspicions and

People don't make that much money so spendinginvestigations might start.illegal money is hard to do without being detected.

The bank does not ask for explanations of money use when you writechecks.They onlyY ask for the use when you go to withdraw cash from youraccount.The only cash there is in the plant is petty cash (lingyong jin),a small cash reserve in the finance department.The plant director's fundis kept in a separate account in the bank. So transactions are generallynot in cash and you can't get cash except for wages.

The plant director can use his discretionary funds for whatever hewants for the plant's purposes without approval from above.But this goesthrough the financial department just like other expenditures, and it isnot possible for the plant director to use this fund for his own livelihood.Major Machinery_Repairs and Overhauls

If you want to make major repairs or overhauls of fixed capital equip-ment, you need to submit an application to the bureau one year in advanceand specify time period of shutdown, the extent of repairs and amount of

-9~

If approved, the bureau releases the money.Generallymoney needed.speaking, it is permitted to have only one major overhaul per 3 years.A major repair is defined by whether or not you have to shut down afurnace and disassemble the brick kiln underneath.To make enlargementsin the plant, or build new shops--basic construction--you must applyto the bureau and if they approve the plans, the state invests all themoney for this activity.They are permitted one major overhaul everythree years.

The money for major repairs and overhauls comes from the "major repairsfund", a separate bank account in the plant's name which they cannottouch without bureau permission.  The amount of money in thisaccountis based on the original cost of the fixed capital in the plant, andthe expected years of productive use.The amount is fixed by complexregulations. When a new piece of equipment is bought by the state,they calculate expected use, divide by 3 years to derive the numberof overhauls, estimate the money, and put it in the major repairsaccount.Finance Department of the Steel Plant

Before l966, they had 9 people in the finance department. One depart-ment head (the informant), one assistant department head. The assistanthead helped him, and took his place during the many meetings which he hadto attend.?There was one cashier, 2 people who worked on costs, two whoworked on funds， and one who worked on wages.The wage person did thepart of wage work not done by the labor and wages department. He deductedfrom wages an amount for living quarters (rent).There was also oneperson who worked on fixed capital.

They all worked in the office allday long.

The cashier's work was simple. He paid out petty cash, wrote checks.Checks had to be signed and chopped by the department head and the vice-director in charge of finance.

The two who work on costs cooperate with the 'costs personnel' (chengbenyuan) in the shop offices.  Each shop has one.The two in the departmentcollect together all the material from all four shops.These are reportson materials use, labor, products6 completed.  These are the originalrecords of each small group whichnhavebeenmadeintoasummaryreport atthe shop level.The reports fromn the shops come up each day and these

Then they straighten them up and maketwo people add them all together.an all plant daily report and sends copies to the plant director and to thefinance department of the bureau.

The funds people work with the production and sales and supplydepart-ments.If payments need to be made by the sales and supply department,they notify these two in advance and they arrange it.They also have tofigure up the accounts, enter these purchases into the accounts.1AlsOat the end of the month they fill out a financial report on the plant.They specify expenditures on materials, parts, and income from sales.They figure up the profit for the month.

The wage person calculates the wages for each worker each month onthe basis of material sent over by the labor and wages department whichgives attendance figures.The main job of this person is to figure howmuch should be deducted from each person's pay packet. Afterwards, hegoes with the cashier to get the cash for the wages. Then the shop'slabor and wages person comes to the department to pick up0the worker'ssalaries.

The fixedcapital manager keeps cards on each piece of equipment in the

-10-plant:machines, furnaces, lathes, tools, desks, cabinets,. lamps.He enters the date bought, price, source, when the equipment was repaired,at what cost, what parts were used, when the piece was transfered to anothershop or sold to another factory.FHehasseveralfilecabinetsfullof

The capital represented:in all of this physical material is muchcards.higher than the circulating capital.

The department head attends meetings convened by the plant directorevery day.In this plant, everything is decided in meetings, and thefinance department is at the core of any economic decision.SSo meetingsfor production, planning, capital renovation, all require the attendanceof the finance department head.  All morning, every morning, there wasa meeting of some sort.The department head also attends meetings outsidethe plant, at the finance department of the bureau, at the finance(caizheng)bureau, or at the bank.At those meetings held inside the plant, all thedepartment heads would attend.  He had to comment on any decision fromthe standpoint of financial considerations.

On the fifth day of every month, the finance department leadsan'economic activity analysis meeting'.

Hegaveatalkabouttheéconomicsituation--costs are high or low, in which shops, in which small groups,

This was the costs part of the presen-in what areas are costs too high.

He did the same for funds--he talked about the liquidity situation.tation.This includes whether or not they are fulfilling contracts fast enoughand getting payments, in which case the production department has toanswer.IfE too many materialss and parts are being bought too fast, thesales and supply department iss told to slow down.

Economic accounting--we've alreadytalked about this from the standpointof the finance department and the shop accounting personnel. But all of

At the small group levelthese figures rest on reportsfrom small groups.in their plant, they also hadgroupaccountants.

His job was simply to

In their steel plant, these basicpick up all the cards of each worker.level accounting records were mainly about the running of the furnace which

How much fuel did they use, how much of which materials,workers tended.how much product came out.'original records' (yuanshi jilu) is the samethingas: 'basic level accounting'.

(6/16/80, 2 hrs.)Economic Targets and the Calculation of Profit

The main economic targets for an enterprise are: l) output, measuredin numbers of items or quantities of items, 2) quality, expressed as apercentageeofgoodsup）to standard (hege lu)， 3) costs, expressed as apercentage reduction from the previous period for selected constant priceproducts, 4) profits, expressed as a total amount of money,based on plantperformance in the previous year and on several previous years running,5) labor norm, which sets the number of workerss to be permanently hiredand engaged in productive labor, 6) staff norm, a limit of non-productionworkers as a percentage of productive workers (between 5-7% (this proportionwent up greatly during the period after the cultural revolution).

TheyProfit calculation.

Thisfiguredependss on costs, and output.figure the total costs for the year,tthen multiplythe number of itemsproduced by the state-set price for up to standard items which have beensold.Then the amount left after subtracting costs from total income isprofit.  If there is a problem with quality standards being met and a buyerrefuses to accept delivery (which is within his rights), then the plantwill just lower the price a bit and sell to another buyer.They will notremelt the steel. In this way they can recoup some of their costs, reducetheir losses.The state-set price only refers to up to standard products,

-11-not to the rejected articles or waste products (feipin).Thewastearticlescan be sold to other buyers for less.

The same is also true for the machineryindustry.The calculation of profit has nothing to do with the amount ofcapital invested in the plant

It happends that some plants fulfill their output targets but not theirprofit targets--this represents a situation of waste.

There can be manycontributing factors.The materials may have been bought at too high a price,

Before the cultural revolution, as soon asor too many may have been used.a problem occurred with profit--they wouldsenda workteamthat verymonth from the bureau finance department.They controlled the profitplan fulfillment very strictly.

Butduringl966-76itwasnotmerelya question of profit targets not being met or controlled--a whole numberof them weren't: controlled by the bureau.During this period no workteams were sent down for non-fulfillment of profit plan.Also, it waseasier to fulfill output targets then because they got smaller--for bothoutput and profit--during these ten years.They did not increase yearby year as they should have.sSo all this time and the economy did not

The worse production became, the lower tthe rargetsexpand rapidly at all.wouldbeeinadjustment.

There has never been any system of figuring profit as a percentage of

Anyway, he insists,capital invested, as they do in capitalist countries.this is really one in the same economic measure, since aall of this moneybelongstothee state anyway, and its not a question of one person expecting

In 30 years of experience hea return on his investment from a laoban.never heard of such a proposal for changing the calculation of profit.

Yes, it does happen that enterprises borrow money before remittingtargetted monthly profits to the finance bureau.This obligationtothebureau comes first, regardless of loans with banks.If the enterprise hasbought too many materials in the early months and hasn't yet sold thefinished goods, tthey can't make remittance payments, and have to get a

If they want to stockpileloan.

But thisiis not the way it should work.goods at the beginning of the year they should first apply for a short-term bank loan, then their remittances to the state finance bureau will notbe influenced.

After the people's congress in l979, they changed the old relationshipbetween the finance bureau and the banks.Before the banks were under thebureau.

Now they are parallel, separate organs.The bank handles all themoney, the finance bureau does not.BProfits are remitted each month.They usually have to be estimated and part of the figure transfered from their

All of the profit must be remitted monthly (oraccounttothetreasury.close to it)， but at thee end of the year it all must be paid in.Only afterthe end of the year will the finance bureau order the bank to remit someof this amount back to the plant as profit retention.Taxes

Taxes are part of the remittance to the state, really the same thing.In steel, there are no taxes, because this is a raw material for making

Only after further processing is the material taxed. Theother products.higher the tax, the lower the profit, and therefore the lower the percentage

There are taxes in theof retained profits forthe director's fund.manufacturing industries, but not in metallurgy.They never worked withtaxes in his finance department.Profits tend generallyytobe higher inmanufacturing before taxes.His enterprise did have one kind of tax, butnot a business tax on profits.If they sold off scrap iron and steel leftoveraftercuttingJ and sizing, the state levied a 3% tax on the proceeds of

-12-thesesales.This was their only tax.It was called 'getting rid ofleftover materials(xia jiaoliao).Great Leap Forward (6/18/80, 2 hrs.)

During the Great Leap, they had a system where the staff studied allSaturday morning, and where seven of the nine staff members went on arotating basis to do manual labor in the shops each Thursday.

The biggest problem during the Great Leap Forward was that the bankswere more lax about rules for payment.[When buying materials, before theGreat Leap they would get a materials receipt (shouliao dan) and the Salesand Supply Department would give it to the Finance Department.Then thebuyer would notify the bank and request payment.TThen the bank wouldrequire three days to notifythe Finance Department to check and see ifit was all right to pay out the funds before releasing the money from thefactory's account. BBut under the policy of 'more, better, faster， moreeconomical' (duokuai hao sheng), they decided to simplify procedures, andabolished the 3 day waiting period.The bank just paid out the money withouttellingtheFinanceDepartmentorcheckingwiththem.This led to anumber of mistakes, sometimes bills were credited to the wrong accounts.Also the Finance Department lost control over expenditures from its account,and didn't know what was going on.They raised objections to this practicemany times, but the bankK just argued back， saying that it didn't matterwhere they took the money from, since they were all state enterprisesanyway. and speedinggthe process would help buiid upthe nationfaster.This was the biggest problem in the Great Leap for the Finance Department.It tookthemseveralmonthsof wastedtime inl96otostraightenout theirplant accounts, and after the Great Leap Forward many plants shut down.Funds management was in disorder.

There were problems during the Great Leap in cost management also.They raised mass enthusiasm, increased production, but violated rules andregulations, making it difficult for them to control materials consumptionrates. Also, they included what normally would be considered waste products

There were not any waste products during thein the 'finished'ccategory.Great Leap.  If they were producing #54 steel and it wasn't up to standard,they would call it #35 steel and include it in the completed category.The Great Leap made it impossible for the finance department to managecosts.They changed regulations so that workers could get raw materialsand fuel directly out of stores and use them without recording it.:Soitwasimpossible to know how much wassinthestores.Also, they wereusing material very quickly, and using too much relative to output, sothere was some waste.But the biggest problem was that they used materialsup fast and it was impossible to measure the rate of use.

Asfar a the management of fixedcapitalL went, the record keeping systemjust broke dowm.They didn't report changess in machinery, moving it toother shops without notifying the finance department.So the cards on fixedcapital equipment did not record this, for all the changes of 2-3 years,and it was a mess.Things were not cleared up until the 3 years of read-

He hadtostart the investigation torecompletejustment that followed.these cards from scratch.

Also, the statistical reporting system up from the shops and small groupson materials use broke down.

Original records were in a mess.?They usedmaterials at a fast rate, but didn't carefully monitor their use.Thenwhen the time came to. fill out reports, sometimess they would have toprod the lower levels to fill them out.

Then they would just estimate andput dowm a few numbers, and give it to the finance department.Then when

-13-the finance department sent the reports up to the bureau, they wereusually right as far as the calculations went, but the original recordsthey were based on were inaccurate.

So as a result of all this， output soared but profits shrunk.Theyalmost doubled their yearly output of steel, but since costs went upprofits went down.1It took them years to clear up their accounts and inven-tories after the Great Leap.It took half a year to0 completely redo therecords on the capital equipment, and they had to do an all-plant inven-tory from the beginning.

They started all over again in funds management.Soduringthe next 3 years of readjustment in the plant, l96l-63, they re-stored the rules and regulations pertaining to finance.

They could notdo it just within one year.

In the latter period of the GLF, serious imbalances developed, mostlyin material supplies.Especially serious was the pig iron, most of whichwas coming from the backyard furnaces.

They called it 'indigenous iron'(tutie)， not pig iron (shengtie).!The sulphur content in it was toohigh, and they had to remelt it， raising costs.Also there were shortagesof coal and lime. Production never stopped in this period, but it got tothe point where the stocks were all used up and they didn't know whethertomorrow's supplies would come in on time.

This meant. that a lot of irregular practices took place with the pur-

They boughtchasingagents andcadres: in sales and supply departments.material at higher prices, above the state-set prices, and engaged inbribery and corruption.What mattered then was not the money, or the method,but success.If you got the job done, that was what counted.

After the end of the GLF, several of the smaller steel plants in thesystem closed, and the workers and staff were dispersed temporarily toother plantss in the system.This is because the material supply situationwas still tight, just as tight as before.Also the GLF stopped in thecoals mines, and pig iron was no longer produced in the villages.Alsothey still had the old pig iron left over which was no good--they couldonly use so much.SSo they closed some plants so material for bigger plantswould be sufficient, and they could begin to build up stores again.Only later did they reopen the smaller plants when the materials situationbecamebetter.This took about one year, in l962 things finally recoveredand smaller plants reopened.This was faster in their system because itwasaan important one.

The main method they had used to increase production was not addingworkers--they already had 3 shifts, so no one worked overtime either.

TheshortenedBut during the 8 hour shift everyone just worked harder.the time for a heat of metal, largely by throwing fueld and materials in

They would make the temperature(this is all by hand) at a much faster rate.rise much faster and much higher. In this way they could fit more heatsof steel into a shift.1But this also meant equipment wore out quicker,and that it sometimes was damaged.They did use some extra workers--temporaryworkers from the families of employees, but this was not a major factor.The major factor was an increase in labor intensityanda quickeningof theheating time by using gang-busting methods to throw materials and fuel onall at once.

When the GLF ended, the plant's production naturally decreased from

The plant itself returned to the pre-GLF productionthe Great Leap levels.levels.Only gradually thereafter did production increase.As a whole;the bureau's steel output was less than before the GLF, because someplants had closed.  Not until l964-65 did production get back onto track and

-14-starttoincreaseagain.

And then before long the cultural revolutioncame, and production fell again.During the Great Leapthecadresin the offices worked overtime late into the night, and sometimes theparty secretary would get the staff to help out in the shops on thesecond shift, in addition to their rotating participation in manuallabor.But during l961-65 they had none of this.Four Cleans Movement

At the end of 1965, a four cleans work team came to the plant.Theyheld meetings after work.Every night， for three hours.These weremeetings with the departments'jpersonnel attending, each department havingtheir owm separate meeting.

They usually would take turns confessingtheir problems in the four areas that were to be clean--economics, politics,thought, and organization.

The movement did not affect the department's work, and never reallyreached the point of criticizing people.

In August l966 the name waschanged to the "Cultural Revolution Work Team".Theiractivitiescchangedthen, and they started to organize criticism meetings of people.They gotall the people that had overseas relations, people who participate? inthe KMT youth organization， and who came ffrom the 'old society'.Soalmostevery staff worker who was not young was put on a platform, bowed his head,and was repudiated and criticized.These criticisms were based on materialscollected and the critical wallposters put up earlier.The wallposterswere coordinated by the work team, which would turn materials over to themasses.The informant was criticized at one of these meetings becauseof his overseas realtives and Hong Kong past. But these criticisms werenot as severe as duringtheCR,especiallythe later 'cleaningg oftheclass ranks'. These four cleans criticism meetings were still polite, and

They talkedwere still small, since they only included department members.to you, you could talk back, aand object to things they said about you.They did not beat you, unlike later on.But during the CR they could beatyou, and you had to confess and had no other choice.Onlyafewworkerswere criticized at the time--those who had participated in the KMT or insecret societies before l949, and there were a lot of them then.

The work team came in waves over different periods, but altogetherthere were 30.The teams were withdrawn in October after the Central

TheygaveParty meeting where Mao tookK power and criticized Liu Shaoqi.out a lot of labels during this movement, but this wasskou maozi， not

When they say kou maozi, they accuse you and put a label ondai maozi.you, you make a self-criticism, and the self-criticism is put in yourfile (dang'an).But dai maozi is an official determination that you havethese historical problems, andathis designation is offically recorded inyour file.

(6/20/80, 2 hrs.)Cultural Revolution

While the work team was still in the plant, they had the beginningsof the rebel faction organized in the plant.The rebels opposed the workteam and said it was suppressing the masses, while the work team opposedthe rebels and put its leaders through criticism.

The rebels were made up of young party members with low status, and also

Theyof non-party members whoohad some sort of mistake on their records.both wanted to use this opportunity to better themselves--the Party membersto climb up in the administration, the non-party members to overturn thebad marks on their records.?These bad marks.were historical problems,bad class backgrounds, political mistakes in the past.They used Mao Zedong's

-15-banner to oppose the work teams, which were under Liu's banner.Theyall knew this at the time based on what they read in the papers. .The grouporganized to oppose the work team because it had the support from aboveandconnections with groups of rebels outside the plant.Wang Hongwenwas one of them--he in fact had problems before the cultural revolution--male-female relations, and he also stole plant materials. He was anordinary cadre, no status, in the security department of the #l7 CottonMill in Shanghai.

The 'conservative' faction also grew up at about the same time.

Butthey were still called rebels.  For a while they were called 'ScarletGuards' (chiwei dui), but near the end of l966 they changed it because ofits reputation for being 'royalist'.This group was made up mainly ofolder workers, and they had a good impression of the leadership, so theyopposed the more 'radical' rebels, saying they were incorrect.

The leadership of the plant crumbled quickly after the work teamsleft.The top leadership and all the department heads6 and shop directorsall stood aside one by one, as wallposters went up demanding that theygo to the shops for manual labor.They just went--they knew they had nopower.The whole structure of leadership melted. ThestaffEworkers stillstayedonat first.

When the leaders went down, members of the rebel faction took their

The Scarlet Guards were small in their 1plant, and were dissolvedplace.before long, with their members mostly joiningtherebels.Therewerefewunaligned people.

They?watchedthedirectionoftheMost people joined.

Why?wind" and joined the rebels.

They wanted to protect themselves,

Of course there were still some older people whogo with the tide.didn't want to participate at all.

The "wind of economism" (jingji feng） occurred when the rebel workersdemanded large wage raises and also money to go to Peking and elsewhereon exchanges on experience.They would get the plant director in his officeand not allow him to leave until he let them have the money.1This wasin the last half of December.They actually did pay large sums of moneyto the workers.They could

pay out the money because in the banksthere were also rebels on the staff, and they did not observe regulations

Normally this would be disallowed by the bank staff--theseaboutcurrency.

There were all kinds of separate rebel organizations,payments were illegal.of temporary and contract laborers also.They were all:looking for fringe

Some were people who didn't get a raise inbenefits and material gain.the last readjustment, and were trying to settle scores with 'those in power'.All the groups were raising these kinds of demands.

At this time I was already in the shop doing manual labor.He hadgone near the end of November.They did not struggle any cadres at thistime--thiscame later.They all were simply working in the shops.  Atthis time the staff members of the finance department, as was typical ofother departments, were all members of the rebel organization.They all

After the head and vice-wanted to survive and move up if possible, too.head of the department went to the shop floor, the staff members stayedand one was6 appointed by the rebel leadership to be the department head, buthe was not called a department head.Formation of RevolutionaryCommittee

This situation continued until sometime after February l967, when theystarted a cleaning of the class rankss campaign.Then many of the staffmembers who also had background and political problems were sent to manuallabor too.Atthattimetheycombinedallthedepartmentsinto2groups-

-16-a production group and logistics group.1Also, right after the seizure ofpower in January or February of l967, they formed a revolutionary committeewith the head being the rebel organization leader.Theyalready hadde facto power, but they hadn't declared it and didn't have the director'schop.

No PLA representatives came to their plant to assist. Therewasnoneed. There was really only one faction in the plant at that time.(Otherplants, like the huge Shanghai Diesel Engine Factory,also had anotherrebel faction called the "East Wind" and they fought, nmaking it necessaryfor the PLA to come.But in their plant there were no soldiers.Itwas the Rebel Headquarters in command.

The revolutionary committee was at first made up only of members ofthe rebel Headquarters.There were both staff members and workers onthe RC.The head was a former staff cadre from the planning department,a young party member in his 30s.Only after the end of the 'cleaning ofthe class ranks' in the last half of l967 did 'liberated' old leadingcadres enter the RC, and even then they didn't have any real leadershiprole.

The cleaning of the class ranks involved self-examinations by eachleadingcadrewhowassentdowmforlabor，andthenacomparisonwiththe personal file (dang'an).TThen if they were not satisfied, they inter-rogated and demanded a further confession of wrongdoing.If they still werenot satisfied, they would struggle at mass meetings, curse and beat you.This happened to a lot of cadres.Theyaalso formed special investigationgroups (zhuan an zu) to investigate thee cases outside the plant. So theprocess was called neicha waidiao.This process went on for a long time,

Whenever more incriminating material came fromright up until early l97l.outside, tthey would struggle and investigate the person all over again.

They also had 'cowsheds', but this was just a nice room where youstayed to write your self-criticism.1If your self-criticism was notgood enough, you would be sent to the shops.:In fact they only liberatedone or two cadres in mid l967, and only because the upper levels demandedmore:'liberated cadres' on the revolutionary committee.

In l967-68 they had another movement called "anti may 16 elements",where they grabbed and struggled a number of young rebel faction memberswho refused to accept orders from the organization.Fewofthemwereleaders, and most of them were 'ultra-leftists' among the masses.Administration after the Cultural Revolution

The informant worked in a rolling mill shop until l969.But his casewas not cleared officially until l972.So he was not liberated, but reha-bilitated when the Party implemented its cadre policy.

He was personallystruggled many times, because of his Hong Kong experience and becauseof the fact that his entire family was still in Hong Kong.

In l969 he was assigned to work in the 'production leadership group'(shengchan zhihui bu) to do concrete work related to finance. There were

This was the same office that he earlierno leadership meetingssfor him.referred to as 'production group' (shengchan zu). It was also calledthe 'production office'

(shengchan bangongshi). ?The names all meant thesame thing, and this was also true for the logistics department.Thegroup was very large, and got progressively bigger as the old cadresreturned to the offices.They all just worked together in one big group.They did not have a lot of leaders.They divided labor but there were nota lot of leading cadres. Just one person, the vice-head of the revolutionary

-17-committee， led the group.FHehadnospecialqualificationsaparet frombeing a leader of the Rebel Headquarters.They just all did planning,finance, and technical work.The logistics group handled administrationand supplies.

Production during these three years was bad.There was no profit atall, but they hadn't reached the point of losing money.They still hadoutput targets,but they were lower than before the CR, and were not always

If they were not met, it didn't really matter,tthey just told themet.bureau they couldn't finish, and the bureau said fine, just send whateveryou have.The situation did not turn around until after the Gang of 4fell.Deng's policies during 1974-76 had not been in power long enoughtohaveanyeffect.They did not reach pre-CR output levels until after l976.There was no investment in the plant during these lo years, no enlargements,no increase in the number of permanent employees.1But there was an increasein the proportion of employees who were non-production personnel, for thereasons stated above.There were no major overhauls of machinery duringthis period either.

This system just stopped.If they couldn't do withsmall repairs, they just stopped using a piece of equipment.Iftheycould still operated a piece of equipment, they kept on running it untilthey couldn't use it anymore.:Soas time went on the number of brokenmachines piled up in warehouses, and all this capital was wasted.:Itwasnot until l977-78 that they made a bigeffort tooverhaul and renovatethis equipment and put it back in production.

It was not until the People's Congress in l975, and the new constitutionand order by Zhou Enlai to restore organizations, that they once again

When they did this, a typicalrestored thee departments and called them ke.pattern was what happened in his finance cdepartment.They had a youngparty member and former rebel leader (transfered in a few years earlier)whowas

made the department head.He had earlier been an ordinary staffmember in a finance department in another factory.

The informant was madea vice-head, and the vice-head from before the CR was also made a vice-head.

The original 7So the leadership of the department was increased by one.staff workers also were in the newly re-established department.

The new department head was in charge of political affairs.The informantand other vice-head were in charge of business work.Theinformant'sworkwassthe same as before the CR except the new department head attended allthee plant meefings now.His job inside the department was to keep an eyeon all the staff members: political thinking, and feel out their ideasduring political study meetings.What was considered good or bad political

This is hard to.say, but generally this just boiled down tothought?

This was the nature of party politicalwhether or not you listend to him.work--attend meetings and feel out people's though, and keep a close watchover them.

When they re-established the Party Committee in l974 they reorganizedthe revolutionary committee.AAt this time they had the policy of'party building'(jian dang).When they did this, they transfered in:a newparty secretary who had been a party secretary in another steel plant beforethe CR.He was 'liberated', but still could not work in his old plant.He became head of the RC and also partysecretary, and the earlier headof the RC became vice-head.At this time the party took over.Beforethistime the rebel headquarters rules in the name of the revolutionary committee.

The original party secretaries6 and plant directors had been in limbofor about 6 years.Then when they re-established the partycommittee,

Beforethey were all transfered.1It was like trading off leading cadres.that they either sat on the RC with nothing to do, or had been ordinary

-18-staff members after a period of manual labor.Naturally, all the oldplant directors had been party members. . They couldn't attain such ahigh position otherwise.

These were all old party leaders, notprofessionals:(neihang).

The only men who could be considered professionalsbefore the CR were usually vice-directors in charge of production whohad been workers,in the party before liberation or activists who becameparty members shortlythereafter..

There were only 3people in the earlier production leadership groupthat handled finance work.

One for cashier work, one for costs management,andoneforfunds management.

No one handled fixed capital.

Theybasically did nothing more than do the accounting work, collating reportsand filling out reports for the directors and the bureau.They did notadditionally exercise management over financial operations. First,they didn't have the time or manpower.

Second, they couldn't because noone would listen to themanyway.They did not have authority, despite thefact that they had positions.People above them did not support them.People below would nat listen.So how could they lead financial workas they did before the CR?

It was not clear, further, that the original records they were working

They no longer had any way of verifying these reports,withwereaccurate.as they did before.So they just had to calculate things as best theycould and send the reports up.There was some exaggeration of output byshops. If a shop or a group wanted materials from stores, they still hadthe materials ordering form(lingliao dan), but they did not adhere to

Sometimes they would send up the order form first, thenit very closely.take the materials.Sometimes they would just: show up at stores and take thingsfirst, saying "hurry up! hurry up!"

And then they would fill in the formlater.

Other times they would just forget the forms.So the.statisticsfor costs were not very accurate.

When the informant worked in the production leadership group, he wasnot doing financial work.This situation continued until l975.He justdid small things, or nothing at all, or went down for labor. He was backin an office, but had little concrete work to do.After the finance depart-

Not until thement was rebuilt things got better, but only gradually.beginningof l978 wasthedepartment entirely restoredand doingits oldwork.Bythis time it was back on its previous, pre-CR track.

After cadres were returned to offices, they did not have any fixedwork.The new cadres would ask their advice whenever there was a problemthey couldn't solve, but this did not mean they would follow this advice.Who wanted to listen to old cadres?So old cadres just sat around, igmoredmost administrative matters.

Generally, old cadres were afraid to make errors, so they were unwillingto accept responsibility and do a lot of administrative work.That is why

They werein l977-78 theyhad to raise the Sslogan "old cadres, stand up!"afraid of taking responsibility,&and afraid of making mistakes.The oldcadres had an attitude toward the new oneswhich can be summed up inthree characters--"quan, bang, dai".This meansthat all1（quan）the workwas given to the old cadres, they had to help）(bang）the new ones，andcarry (dai) them along.1None of the old cadres were criticized from l973-77,but when they criticized Deng Xiaoping, all the old cadres felt bad because

Also they knew that their fate was tied to his.they had sympathies with him.Changesafterthe Gang of Four

(6/23/80, 2 hrs.)

They criticized and demoted every one of the new leading cadres in thedepartments and on the revolutionary committee.They were all criticized in

-19-meetings, but they varied in intensity.SSome meetings were not too serious.Others were real struggle meetings.But in the end they all went back totheir pre-cultural revolution jobs in staff positions or in workshops.There were over lo of these people in the plant.AAll of them were formerworkers and were sent back to production posts.

Veryfew rebels werestaff members before the CR.

The old cadres lookeddown on the newer cadres,because the new oneshad in the past looked down on them.

But in fact the new cadres didnotreallyI understand things.  sSo the old cadres just ignored them.

They abolished the revolutionary committee in l979.Afterwardstheleading group was the same.The old director became the plant directorand vice-party secretary, while a new party secretary was transfered infrom elsewhere.This new plant director was the pre-CR plart director,who had been put on the revolutionary committee afterwards.The newparty secretary came from a different plant.

Before the RC was abolishedthere was a l/3 overlapo in the revolutionary committee and party committee,but most of this overlap was in key leading positions.

When the Gang of Four fell in l976, the old rebel headquarters leaderwas still the head of the RC.But in l977 he went back to be a worker.andtheoldplantdirectorbecamethehead.This RC head had been thehead of the RC and a vice-party secretary. Nc party secretary existeduntil the new one came in afterthe Gang of Four, and as soon as he came they

All thiscriticizedtheoldrebelleader: as a 'rotten leader' (huai toutou).time he had led both the RC and1 party committee, but the party still.onlyhad a party leading core, they did not have a formallpartycommittee andparty secretary for many years,After he fell, this old rebel leader,who was a party member, continued to be a partymemberbutwasnotontheparty committee.

Up until the time the informant left, they had not yet held any demo-cratic elections.  ?This was only an experimental policy, and they hadit in the newspapers.1But although they want this in Peking, the cadres

They want peoplein power in the bureaus and factories don't welcome this.below them who will listen to their orders.AAnd shop directors who areelected by workers may not have these qualities.:So this policy will notbe implemented very smoothly in units.

In the fnance department, tthe department head transfered in earlier wasstill in charge when he left, and the informant was still onlythevice-head.Generally speaking, some rebels who had been department heads,iif theywere familiar with the work of the department and had not made mistakeswhile being leaders, would just become vice-heads.(Otherwise they wouldbe sent back to the shop floor.

Aftertheleadership? group was reorganized after the Gang of Four,

This is because the old cadres werethe production situationimproved.back in charge, and because they were being supported by the top leaders inthe factory and also by people in the corresponding departments in the

So nowtheybureau.The bureau departments were also recently restored.have the authority to strengtheb and enforce systems of rules and regulations.

They had lost money every year in the plant from 1967-76 (this conflictswith an earlier statement).They still lost a little in l977, made a smallprofit in 1978, and made more in 1979.In each of those years they had nochoice but to borrow from the banks, loans which they never repaid.

They couldget away with this because the leadership situation in the banks wasthe

Old rebels were in power, and they were notCadheringsame as in the factory.to regulations carefully.The bank leadership also changed when the Gang fell.

They spent much of 1977 repairing and renovating all the machinery that

The bureaugave them supplementaryfunds forhad worn down over the years.

-20-this. So in l977 production still hadn't returned to a fully normal state.In the past three years they finished the output targets. The problem hadbeen in profits.  Quality also improved, largely because they began toenforce regulations relating to this, and had means for enforcing them.Before this, if quality was bad and the other plant wouldn't accept thegoods, they would just put the bad steel in the stores， and use it forbartering with other factories. The contract would then be unfulfilled,and would take several more months for them to make the delivery of thegood steel specified in the contract.  Now, largely because the qualitystandards are being met, they are meeting contracts on time more often.If contracts aren't met on time, inspection teams are seht down from thebureau.]If you have met output quotas but not completed all contractsby delivering all goods by December 3l, then your output target is notconsidered complete.There are no penalties for failing to live upto contracts now, but it does reflect badly on the top leadership andis embarrasing to them.

They had tests for both cadres and workers after the Gang of Four fell.They tested for skills, foreign language ability, engineering skills.These were for reference purposes in assessing people for raises.lBut somany people tested so low, it didn't get taken much into account. Thismethod will work better once the four modernizations have proceeded further.These tests were not used to determine people's qualifications for beinga cadre. There were no business classes for cadres, although there wereclasses for foreign language.Factions

He stresses a final point made earlier about factions.?They havealways had factions, before the cultural revolution and even today.Butsince the CR they have had to do with relations between people, and hadno special political content.  It all has to do with how fast you haverisen, whether you were lower in the past than another person, whether youlook dowm on another because they don't have the qualifications to dothe job, in your opinion.TThis happened becauseofcultural revolutionchanges, but was not limited to that and they still have this problem.

-21-

描述：

