id: ad1fa924d3
标题：Hong Kong Interviews: Informant No. 14
日期：1980-2-24
是否是时间段：false
作者：Andrew G. Walder
来源：
标签：文章
书籍：Hong Kong Interviews: Informant No. 14
书籍作者：Andrew G. Walder

正文：
INFORMANT NO.14PERSONALDATA

Sex:MaleAge:50Education:Medical college graduateTotal Years Relevant Experience:

12Last Year of Relevant Experience: l979

Year Left China:1979

LegalInitial Immigration Status:Native Place/oyerseas Connections:

HongKong native/returned1950Class Background/Political Designation:OS

OCCUPATIONAL HISTORY SUMMARYPositions Held:  l) Doctor in factory hospital, Defense plant complex in

Hunan, 1968-79Administrative Level of Work Unit/(No. of employees):

1) Ministry until l973, then provincial/(20,000+)APPOINTMENTS:1

TOTALHOURS:2.25

PAGES TEXT:

3No. 14Occupational History

(2/24/80, 2.25 hrs.)

The informant originally worked in a paint factory as an accountantand union cadre during 1950-53, and later went to university from 1953-58,at the Hunan Medical College, Changsha.After graduation, he became assistantprofessor of medicine (Pediatrics) there. He taught and practiced medicineat the same time. In l968, since Mao suggested that intellectuals go to thecountryside for labor, they suggested that the hospital staff be reduced by75%.In fact, they only reduced it by 25%.Theyweresentallover--tofactories, to communes.The informant was sent towork inafactoryhospitalin a national defense plant in Hunan. He worked at this enterprise until1979.Structure of the Enterprise

In l968 he was sent to a National Defense Plant, a complex of over20,ooostaffandworkersinHunan.The enterprises in the complex produceda number of products.One was a bearings factory, another produced spare

There were also assembly plants for aircraft enginesparts for airplanes.

They also had a transport team, for both road and waterand aircraft bodies.transport.The plant owned its owm boats, trucks, and would ship theirproducts all over the country, as well as ship in materials.TThey travelleddowm rivers in Hunan to the Dongting Lake, and then on to the Yangzi Riverand to the East China Sea.

Every branch factory had its owm clinic, and each clinic had one doctor,a few nurses, and a few patient rooms with some medicine and instruments.

If they were serious, theyBut this was for simple illnesses and injuries.would send them to the hospital attached to the complex.

The hospital wascalled the 0l3 system #l staff hospital.

This was mainly for the airplaneplant, but since it was the best hospital in the area, they would also treatsome local peasants and workers from other plants, if their health problemswere serious.

The hospital as well as the enterprise were under the No. 3 MachineBuilding Ministry, which handled aircraft building forthe entire country.During l968-73, the plant was directly under the leadership of the Ministry.The ministry was divided into 3 systems--01l, 012, 0l3, 014.BHis was the0l3 system.

The plants in the system were located in Guizhou, Shanxi, Hunan,and Hubei.jEach system was in fact a large integrated complex, spread outover several counties, so they called it a systemn(xitong） and not enterprise(qiye).

Each system had a special finished product that they produced.The Hunan system made warplanes, the Hebei system made aquatic planes, etc.Each system was like an enterprise, it had its own Revolutionary Committee.Other airplane plants were also directly under the Central Ministry in otherprovinces, but these were enterprises and not systems.

Around 1973-4, under the idea of transfering powers dowmward, theministry established provincial bureaus in each province where it had operations.in order to lead the local plants under the ministry.Then they had dual leader-ship with the provincial national defense office (guofang gongye bangongshi),which was under the provincial RC.Then the ministry office still didplanning and supply, while the national defense office did inspections, politicalwork.Wages

Informant's paygrade wasl3 onthe technicalcadres scale bythe timehe left. BHe had been given two raises during his career.He made 4o+¥ aftergraduation, and one year later was raised to 52.5¥. Then in 1964 he was

-1-raised to 59¥, and in l977 he was raised to 69￥.1That was his wage whenhe 1eft in 1979.

Recently. they have instituted a bonus system.First semi-annually:and later monthly.They would meet and discuss among all the doctors in hisdepartment.  Criteria--work attitudes, tardinesss and attendance, quality ofworkK (success/failure rate of patients, operations, etc.)， and also takethe patients' comments into account.The department head would lead theseappraisal meetings for doctors' bonuses.Doctors and Sick Leave for Workers

The clinics and the hospital doctors were the ones who signed the sickleave certificates (jibing zhengming shu). Only doctors who had universitydegrees could do this, nurses could not.After getting the certificate, theworker would take it to his shop director and get off of work.EBeforemid-1977, many workers came in to ask for sick leave. But this gradually lessenedoff after then because new bonus regulationssaidthat if you hadover 3 daysof sick leave per month, no bonus.

How to tell if a person is really sick or faking?It is difficult, sincethere is a whole range of seriousness in diseases. Is someone slightly ill,faking, or serious?

You can give exams, but often come up with no clearindicators.But the worker still insists he's sick, and may ask for 2-3 daysleave. sSometimes I would check with the shop foreman first in really doubtfulcases, and often would just cut the request down to one day. what happenedin l977 is that workers stopped asking for sick leave for common colds andminor discomforts, coughs, and diahreha.

Workers knew that before l977 whether or not they came to work, and i:whether or not they worked hard, they would get the same pay.

So during theperiod of the Gang of 4, Lin Biao attacks on "checking and suppressing"workers, this problem increased.  I remembers that this was an especiallyserious problem during 1969-7l or so, and got better during 1973-4 when Dengcame back and tried to revise rules and regulations.Thentheproblembecame worse again during l975-77 due to criticism of rightists and thesuppressing and checking of workers.

This was especially a problem with workers who had more than 8 yearsseniority.They would get full pay even if they had six months of sick leaveper year. But workers with less than 8 years would only get paid injury  1leavebut would had sick leave deducted from salary.

So the younger workers tendedto ask for long leaves only for serious problems.whydid workers do thisduring these periods of time?

On the one hand, no one was checking them orpenalizing them very regularlyY during these times. On the other hand, wageshadn't changed for a long time and were low, so workers would very quicklyask for sick leave if they had a chance.

Any corruption of doctors for sick leave certificates?  Hard to tell,it depends of individual cases.

But generally there is not much, since youcan be criticized if discovered, especially! since all exams and leave recordsare kept on file.1 Also, doctors wages are fairly high, and there are nolivelihood problems, while workers wages are not that high.  So generally thereis no corruption of this sort.But you can't say it never happens.1Peoplestill might give small gifts, especially of meat and things that are rationedfor everybody.

But doctors were discovered doing this during and after 1969,and more than once, and were criticized for it.This was more common, andmore severe during the CR. The method is not usually to give gifts or money;but to 'open up the back door' (kai houmen) for doctors.

This means that yougive doctors6special treatment in return for (understood)) special favors later.For example, if you have a relative who works in a store, you can make sure that

-2-the doctor is at the head of the waiting list for difficult-to-buy books,food， appliances， etc.TThis happens generally in society, a 'mutual helpkind of arrangement.

When the problem of paid absenteeism became most serious, cadres wouldvisit the clinics and the doctors to talk over the problem and suggest thatthey should be more strict in giving out sick leave forms.But they reallydidn't give orders to reduce the total number because the final decisionon a person's health was always the doctors'. So they would talk over theproblem with them but there were no direct orders.

The problem got better about the time the bonus system, with limitson sick leave, was started in l977. He wouldn't really say that this wasthe only reason, but it was certainly one of them, since he has not reallyanalyzed the question.But also management had been strengthened aboutthat time--shop directors and group leaders had more power, and responsibilitieswere clarified for individuals.  So this problem was gradually reduced.

一3一

描述：

