id: 9408dcd7eb
标题：Hong Kong Interviews: Informant No. 72
日期：1984-3-1,1984-3-7,1984-3-9,1984-3-29,1984-4-5,1984-4-18,1984-4-23
是否是时间段：false
作者：Andrew G. Walder
来源：
标签：文章
书籍：Hong Kong Interviews: Informant No. 72
书籍作者：Andrew G. Walder

正文：
No. 72 (New York)Background:(3/1/84， 1.5 hrs.)

The informant worked at the Petroleum Refinery of Changsha City,ProvinceofHunan.Itemployedaround5oo.Itwasoriginallyunderthejurisdiction of the provincial petroleum refining bureau, but in l976 wasput under the chemical industry bureau of the city of Changsha.He workedthere for 6 years; 1971-77.The plant was established during the GreatLeap Forward, many of the oldest workers were peasants who moved intothe city during that era.Before the CR almost all workers were originallypeasants, the workforce really had a peasant flavor.Even until todaymost of these older workers still live in individual dorms, and theirfamilies still are in the countryside.

Later some of them could get theirfamilies into the city and put them in the factory in a separate "dependentsdormitory". Most workers lived in factory housing.  The workers--we calledthem "the old '58 workers" (lao wuba gong)--all had urban hukou, but nottheir families.  After the CR this.changed; the old workers began toretire with pensions, young workers from the city hired more often afterthis.Theseold'58workerswereallbaoshoupaiduringtheCR--theywereall wuhao gongren--model workers. During the years I was there they hiredaboutloo new workers, all young and from the city， someof them of coursewere educated youth from the countryside.(Of the latter group，most weresent-down children of the factory's employees(fromthefamilydorms）.This was an official policy on the part of the work unit， and it wasencouraged by the government.?They said the factory should sclve workers'problems like this on their own.

I was an apprentice for 3 years, l8, 20,.22 ￥.During this periodI spent a lot of time as a full-time basketball player on the factory'steam.But he was assigned a master and so forth, even though he wasoften absent from work.After three years, he was a grade one worker,and after one more year, grade 2 at 35 yuan. Because he worked at hotandhazardous physicalwork，hegot 4.5 ¥ of hightemperaturegrainsupplements, so he got 38.5¥ altogether, and this is what most everyonegot, because they all got up to grade 2， and then couldn't get any higher.The workers called it the aiji xian (Egypt line--he draws a picture ofa pyramid).You can't get any higher that this (the tip of the pyramid).When you're grade two, they say you've "reached the Egypt line". Theolder workers, many were grade 4 and 5, but very few were 6,7, andalmost no 8's.

Therewereother kindsof supplements for hightemperature.In the summer they gave workers another 2 ￥，but more often they gave ussugar and ludou (meng beans).TTheycamefromthefactory'scafeteria.Sometimes they gave them tickets for popsicles that they can exchange atice cream parlors. This was just a fuli, like buying shoes and clothesfor workers.]Itisa policyofaxitong，notthenationasawhole.

The factory had a small farm out in the suburbs about lo kilometersaway.During the CR they acquired it,they got the farm because Maosaid everyone should learn gong, nong, bing. So workers and cadreshad to engage in labor and learn how to shoot guns.TThiswaslikeaMay 7 cadre school but was not called that.TThe "bad elements" from thefactory worked there--people with bad biaoxian.  They got the land fromacommuneinexchangeefor an arrangement whereby the factory would repair themachinery of the commune in their small enterprises.TThe peasants fromthat commune had the exclusive right to get all the shit out of the factory's

-2-latrines. The factory gave them old machinery they no longer needed. Theycould lend their projector to the commune to show films for them.Thefactory sent its Chairman Mao arts troupe tothem to perform at thespring festival.

So the peasants helped the factory grow sweet potatoes,cabbage, pigs on the farm.

It was a good deal for them, it was apermanent agreement.

What kind of people from the factory went there?Bad elements werethe first kind; people who stole, were liumang, had bad thought.Thefactory security department decided this， it didn't go through thepublic security bureau.  A second kind was "volunteer" labor; laodongduanlian, maybe once a month they would send 2oo people out there intrucks for one day.Over the time he was there the workers went thereless and less.1Why did they do this?Notonly1 to get food for thefactory， although that was part of it, but real purpose was to reformyou thoughts.  lBut it was an advantage economically as well because thefactory could get pork, which was very scarce then. All the food wentto the dining hall.Other factories he knows of had orange groves andpeach trees, some planted watermelons.AAt spring festival the dininghall had a banquet at spring festival; lots of meat, wine, vegetables,and products from our farm, and it was free. This was a good deal. Butthis was also a source of corruption.Leaders could get pork for themselvesand workers wouldn't know.The head of the dining hall would cut a dealwiththefactoryheadtoget promoted by giving away food for them. Thefood would disappear from the dining hall from time to time and when thishappened sometimes a worker would put up a wallposter saying "where didour pork go"?  Or sometimes instead of a spring festival banquet theywouldgiveusallsomemoneyinsteadofthebanquet.Thiswasasignthatall the food from the farm was going somewhere else.Another source ofcorruption was when the factory traded the goods it produced for othersupplies for other supplies or for food. There is no way for the workerstoreallyknowwhatisgoingonamongthe·cadres.

So I was a worker for the entire·6 years, actually three yearsapprentice.:I was not a good element.1I was not youth league, not amodel worker, and didn't participate in militia training.I also hada bad background.All I wanted to do was study.The shop head had thepower to send you to go to the farm for labor if he didn't like you.

Hesent me there twice--for about one week each time.Sometimes people weresent for a month (they could return home to sleep).The shopohead didn'tlike me, he said I wasn't a socialist worker, but a bourgeois intellectual.He had me criticized in the group several times.They sent severaldoctorsand engineers also. So if the shop head didn't like you, you were introuble.This was arranged directly by the shop director， not the topfactory leadership.The shop head was also the party branch secretary;an old 8th route army fighter.

Sooneeday he said to me: "Lao Liang, please come see me after work."I went into his office, he said "sit down."  "Smoke?" "No.""Tea?" "No.""Well, Liang, I'll tell you truthfully.TTheleadershavemetanddecidedthat you're thought isn't good, so you should go to the farm for a while."I said "oK, great!"  What else could Isay?

This cadre really didn't like me.He couldn't understand why I studiedsomuch. He would say "why do you have to study allthe time?  Aren't youa worker? You work with your hands, not your mind." He knew I was studyingbecause I did it at work.Work was so lax nobody did much but their ownthings, repair clothes and so forth. But I read.

-3-Political Organizations  (3/7/84, 2 hrs.)

In l97l when I got to the factory there was only a revolutionarycommittee, and it replaced both the factory director system and theunion system.But it still had the people's militia and youth league.At that time the factory seemed like an army, based on a military system.The whole society was organized like the military then.Shopsandgroups were renamed with military names: a work group was a ban (squad),above that was the pai (platoon) [equivalent to the section], and abovethat was the workshop.level, the lian (company). [In his usage, the gongduanand the chejian are the same level of organization, the intermediate levelhe is less clear about the name, but it sounds like the'shift' thatis sometimes between groups and shops in other continuous process factories].

The revolutionary committee (RC) had a head (zhuren), and severalvice-directors.Theyweretheleadersofthefactory.The members (weiyuan)were the leaders ofthe shops; they all attended these meetings.:The RC headwas the party secretary, the vice heads are vice secretaries.  A mergingofthe party and the administrative organization.: In reality the Party ledeverything.The party meant the RC, the same. It was a mixture of party,administrative, and military organization.

At theshoplevel，therewerelianzhang，theyweretheheadsof theparty general branches.There were several vice heads, and also twoor three vice branch secretaries. And then there were several membersof the shop committee, who were the paizhang.The pai is equal to theparty branch, or youi could also call it a dang xiao zu.The head of the paiisaheadofthedangxiaozu.

The ban was the basic level of production.  The head was always apartymember.They are members of the party group at the pai level. Theban had usually between 5 and l2-l5 members.[Wealsocalledittheworkgroup (zuoye zu）.There were two party members in my own group ofeleven.

There was a youth league. The secretary of the youth league committeeof the factory was a vice party secretary of the factory.Theheadsofeach level of the CYL organization (which paralleled the party organizationall the way down) were vice heads at each level of the party organization.There were 3 CYL members in my group.

The functions of the political organizations:to carry out the partyline，sometimes on the direct orders of the party organization in thechemical bureau, sometime from newspapers or Red Flag. They would say"grasp revolution, speed production". A second function was social control,and control of promotions and transfers.?They controlled all promotions.They controlled all matters and transfers. Your salary, whether you arecriticized, whether you get housing, whether your wife can get a job in thefactory, whether your kid can come back from the countryside.

The youth league had 3 functions.1Whenever there was a party meetingthe CYL would have another meeting and read out the same reports and discussthem all over again..Second, to recruit league members and train themto become party members.You have to pass through the youth league tobecome party members. Third, to gather volunteers for shock brigades(tuji dui) to get things done right away.For example, if there is a leakin the pipes somewhere or something is broken and needs fixing right away,the party will get the CYL to mobilize young people to volunteer and doit right away.For example,if they were digging some foundations ortunnels, workers will do it very slowly because they have no motivation,and they will complain about conditions.sSo they'il hold a meeting in the

4shop, criticize the workers, and then tell the tuji dui, the shock brigadeof activists, to do it, andthey'll stay up all night and so it in lessthanhalfthetime.They work like crazy.TThen the party secretary willcall another meeting and criticize the workers again, saying "you workerscomplain about conditions, you just have no revolutionaryfeeling，theseyoung boys did your work for you overnight!"!The workers got mad atthese shock brigade members, we really hated these activists.

The militia's functions were to guard against class enemies andready forwar with the USSR.The militia went to people's houses to checkon household registrations, especially if there were youths that had snuckback into the city from the countryside.TThey would report them and makethem go back. They also keep an eye on the "bad elements" from pastcampaigns.If there is any political movement, the militia grabs thesepeople and makes them come in for political study and criticism. Atnight they patrol the factory grounds.

There are two kinds of militia (minbing).FBasic(jigan)，everyoneexcept bad elements and workers over 4o and older women workers. I wasconsidered dangerous white expert roader.  Also I was the only young workerwhowasnotamemberofthebasicmilitia.Soalmostallyoungworkerswere members of the militia (only workers, not staff).These militiawere really only militiamen in name.They were just called this, it waspart of being a worker then, there was no real military training.

There was also the armed militia.They have guns, and these are theones who do the three things listed above. These people are young activists,youth league members and party members.They are taught how to march,drill,andshoot.They were treated as soldiers by1 the local army headquarters.They run around marching, charge at dummies, aand yell "Kill!"

Aroundl973theyrestoredtheunionandtookawaythemilitarynames.But the system in reality did not change.I entered the factory in October197l.The army officers had just left the RC.The workers didn't likethe soldiers, I used to talk with them about it.They said they didn'tknow about howto run a factoryor motivate workers;they just treatedworkers like soldiers, just knew how to run political study, and make usdig bunkers.Many said they just had sex with women in the factory， andsometimes married them.

Staff Offices

Under theRC(partycommittee）office,therewereseveralke，actuallycalled zu when he first got there and later changed around l973.Therewas the administration dept. (housing, work clothes, cafeteria, borrowingmoney, the farm and the pigs, labor insurance, clinic, travel subsidies),the production dept. (production tasks in each shop, scheduling, salesand supply, transport, technical drawings and designing--these were alldivided into separate depts after they changed in the mid l970s.), thepersonnel and security dept (renbao zu, which handled dossiers, investi-gations, transfers, contacts with the public security, labor reeducation,liumang,bad elements, and the militia.1Later it split into separateperso-nel dept., security dept.).TThey also had a reading room withparty publications and reference news. I knw all of these because theoffices were in the bottom floor of my dorm building.

5Factory Residences and the Resident's Committee (3/9/a4, 2 hrs.)

Along Liuyang River Road there were a number of factories withfactory housing across the street from them.There was a very bidstreet committee headquarters that managed them. It was under thenorthern district of Changsha.1Each separate neighborhood underneath it hadresidents' committees. Some were ordinary residents，some were directlyattached to the factory.So our dorm district was under both the factoryand the Liuyang River street committee.There were about lo00 peopleinour residentscommitteearea;l4 buildingsinall.Not allfactoryfamilies lived there.Some had families still in the countryside andlived in the single person's dorm.Others lived in the city, and bikedin every day.

Only a third group had their families in the factory.

the residents committee runs government policies, like

Leadership:family planning; they watch bad elements. The residents committee

They also mobilized people to goofficewasnexttothepoliceoffice.to the countryside, and to see if youth had come back illegally..Onholidays, the cadres of the committee would do safety work--makesurepeople didn't start fires with lanterns, etc. TThey also handledpolitical study.

The factory distributed housing， it was responsible for repairingit, the plumbing, etc., and for digging tunnels.

Distribution of Housing

There werethree methods.1First，if both husband and wife workin the factory， they have the best chance. But they register and areput on a waiting list.Theyregisteratthehousingofficeoftheadministrationdepartment.So there is a lot of back door， not alwaysconnected with biaoxian.They give gifts to cadres that administerthis.Cigarettes--good ones.Sugar.lBecause the economic conditionswere so bad then, they would use their coupons to buy for cadres.Kerosene,sesame oil, bicycles.All these things are scarce, and they weregiven to cadres in this office.Tickets for basketball games， PekingOpera.!This is very open.‘They walk into the office and openly askabout their housing assignment.The cadre will say "oh, there are somany people in line, what can I do?"  So you say, "Hey, there's abasketball game coming up, want a ticket?"  "Yeah, make it two!" Thenyou'll offer him sesame oil later on.(Ofcourseheneverwouldsaythat he would give you housing for this, but after a while he wouldsuddenly find an empty room and give you the keys, cross you off thelist.You really had to do this to get a place.Thewaitinglistreally didn't mean much.:Ihadafriendwhowastoohonestandnevergave anything to the cadres. We all laughed at him behind his back,called him stupid--3 years and still no housing!To get married youneed housing from the unit as well.

A second way to get housing is if you are transfered from out of

Otherwise you can't live and worktown they have to give you housing.there.If the factory doesn't give you housing they have to pay yourhotel fees. I was put in this way because I came from Shuangfeng county.They put me in a room like this one with two other guys.

The third method:  also going through the back door, but notthrough the housing management office.1You do something for theplant director or party secretary of the factory, and you get your

Itis hardtodoithousingfaster.But this wayisverydangerous.this way.Its too clear what is going on and it makes people angry.The method is the same with the top leaders, mainly giving gifts.Workersget mad at this, they're always quarreling among themselves over housingdistributions.

-6-

Biaoxian also had an effect on who got housing.Those with goodbiaoxian were high on the list, those who were bad elements were low.There are always many people living in the city and that have tocommute long distances.They prefer to live in the factory.Forexample, in my group, 3 workers lived in the city and wanted to moveto the factory, they all registered and got in line. One had very badbiaoxian, the other two very good.  So the leader of the shop givesopinions to the housing office.You see, the application is madethrough the director of the shop. The group leader gives a verificationthathousing is really needed.The forms then are sent to the shop andshopofficialshelptheworkerfillthemoutandsendthemback.Sothis one worker with bad biaoxian applied,but the shop head didn'treally want him to get housing.After the application is made, the shopleadership has a meeting to decide if the person really needs housing.They don't necessarily approve the application.They may strongly supportit if they do like the person.1But if you aren't approved this wayyou can still go through the back door.This one worker who was notapproved by the leadership, and had bad biaoxian,1really knew how togive gifts and use the back door. He got housingfaster， and it reallywas good housing, right next door to an engineer， much better than theother two workers were given.

The back door also works for the hiring of jiashu gong.YYoucanrequest at the shop for these as well， and if they support you theywill hire your family member as a temporary worker at low pay.sShopheads have a meeting to decide who really needs a job for their wife orchild.This is one way that informing (xiao baogao) pays off.Theinformers get preference in this system.Theupperlevels don't knowyou; the shop leaders relay information, advice, recommendations.Dining Hall

Usually its the single worker who eats here. Those who have afamily may simply buy a dish and take it home to eat.Breakfast, lunch,dinner, they served all three.The single workers hukou was in thefactory, and managed by the security department. Rice rations, meat,oils, peanuts, beans and all rations were handled by the dining hall.For people with families, the residents committee of the factorygave out tickets for rationed items.

You did have to pay for this food.I made 35 yuan per month, andlived in the single dorm.I paid 3-4 yuan each month for rent and utilities.Each month I spent l5-20 yuan to buy rice and prepared dishes.Ibought toothpaste, soap, and so forth from the factory store.Thefactorystore was run by temporary workers.I got haircuts in the factory'sbarber shop as well.

They hired temporary workers and hired professionalbarbers to train them, and then they got them to cut hair in the factory.

All these extra expenses cost about 5 yuan.TheyItcostabout20fen.also showed movies in the factory every Saturday and Sunday. This wasdone by the union, tickets were much cheaper than public theatres,about lo fen or 2o fen per movie.It was in a large meeting hall.Ismoked, so I spent another 8 yuan on cigarettes.

I would usually keep about 5 to 8 yuan as emergency money.If I didn't need it then I would save it.I joined an incormal creditpool among the workers (dahui). There was no interest, they just heldthe money.Like a lottery pool.Each worker would contribute 5 yuaneach month， but get the pot only one month a year.You'd get about60 yuan all at once. This was like an informal credit association run

-7-entirely by the workers. This helps you buy a bicycle, which costsat least l20 yuan, or go to visit your family.DistributionofBenefits

What benefits do workers value the most?  First, work shoes andclothes. Second, the high temperature fees--ice cream, tea, beans.Third, medical insurance. You get free care, and dependents pay only70 percent of costs. Its very cheap, but quality is bad. Good system,bad quality. ILendingmoneytoworkersisafourth.If youhaveanemergency like a death in the family, you can ask to borrow money fromshop leaders, who decide. Only workers with good biaoxian get this.The shop used the control of housing, jobs for dependents, and loans tocontrol workers.lFor loans, you have to fill out form and have themapprovedbygroupleader, then the shop office has a meeting to decide.You can't just go and apply directly to the union office.Theshopleaders control the applications.

If you get it, the leaders tell you how your problem is now solved,and that this shows how the party is concerned about you and is takingcareofyou.Then you have to express your thanks to the party forcaring for you.Later if yougoofoffat work，thesameleaders willtry to make you feel guilty and remi-d you of how the party took careof you in the past. Then you say, "I'm sorry, I apologize to the partyand will work harder in the future to show my gratefullness." I hadbad biaoxian so I never felt I could request a loan, I would feel guiltyif I did.

Now this is the formal way.There are also the informal ways.You can go through the backdoor and use personal relations as well.Theshop director (one of them liked me because I played on the basketballteam and gave him tickets) would arrange a loan for me if I asked andtold me not to tell anyone else about it.

There are two ways to get things.1Firstisoutstandingbiaoxian.But this is very hard.You always have to be correct, support the leaders,and volunteer.If you make just one mistake, even one， then all of yourefforts are wasted.So going through the back door is easier, actuallyyou should say guanxi. Back door is just one part of guanxi.Guanxi

You do things for the leader.Help him do work after hours,help them clean their room, help him buy lunch from the dining hall.This is building up guanxi, but it is not really called going throughthe back door.TThis is more an arrangement where "I use you" and"you use me". Not the same as the back door described before. Itis more complex, a special social relationship.The back door isdifferent in that you have a specific goal and you have to use giftsto get your purpose accomplished. The back door is simple and moreconcrete.This is not the same as political relationships betweenactivists and party leaders. Sure there are things activists and partyleadersdofor eachother，andtheyhelp）each other out, but they alsohave a leadership relation as well. The party controls the activiststoo, and this is not guanxi.sSome party members learn how to useguanxi, but there are also Lei Feng types who don't do it and don'teven know how to.

Ganqing and renqing are not used when talking about guanxi inthe factory.These terms have to do with personal relations.  We diduse the term yiqi; this has to do with people who like to help one another

-8-and emphasize their guanxi.But I never used the term ganqing aroundthe factory. That's only for family and friends. But People's Dailydoes criticize people for "putting ganqing in place of policy"--there they mean private relationships.So ganqing is not really afeeling, but a relationship that is private, not things done accordingto policy.You just could not say ganqing in Hunanese--that's thefeelingbetweenhusbandandwife.Perhaps its more natural to saythis in Cantonese.Activists (3/29/84, 1.5 hrs)

Before the CR the activists were call "labor models" by thegovernment,  but individual workers still called them activists.Activist standards changed by the period.  Before the CR, youhadtohavegoodclassbackground，hadtobePartyorCYLmembers，worked hard,like a machine.Threefunctionsoflabor models:Thesewere people who talked about the Party's policy and propaganda, gavespeeches in group meetings.They report ordinary people's workhabitsandthoughts，utterancestotheleaders.Theyalsohelped the party leader by having hear to heart talks with theother workers, influence them to become model workers too.

Model workers got an award at the end of the year, a towel,a notebook，Mao's works.They also showed their pictures on abulletin board in the factory.

Sometimes they would display them insidethe factory, sometimes outside on the street. They also get to go tomeetings that g-et them out of work, or can go travel to Peking.

During the CR these people became the conservative faction (baohuangpai) who defended the shop secretary， and shop head.TTherebels(zaofanpai) hated them and attacked them.The rebels beat them up.Todaythe zaofan pai is gone, and the labor models are important once again.

During the CR period we didn't call model workers that, but wecalled them "wuhao gongren". So the five good workers replaced theoldmodelworkerswhohadbeenfooledbyLiuShaoqi.TThey had fivenew criteria:good personal habits, political thought, cooperationwith other workers and leaders, revolutionary discipline (labor discipline),work activism.

After 1972 they started to rebuild the party org-anization.Somerebels went to jail, others were executed, and they rebuilt new leadingbodies in the factory. They didn't establish the revolutionary committeeuntil l970.  Gradually the rebel faction lost power. 1In name, theystill sat on the RC, but in reality the army was in charge， alongwith the new party cadres transfered from elsewhere because theywere hated in their old units, We called it the "great exchange ofcadres", and some workers would bet on how long the new leaders wouldlast in the unit.

The new activists came from among the old activists before the CR.They would watch over other workers and report on them.In reality1theworkers didn't hate the party leaders as much as the activists whowere always reportingonthem.Activists are keylinksbetweenthemasses and the top party leaders, who are distant from the workers.

Gugan fenzi and jiji fenzi are slightly different.A backboneis someone who has already applied to the CYL and Party.They arepeople who are in a period of testing by the party and by the masses.They are the most outstanding of the activists who are not yet in theParty or CYL.They are often young.

-9-

Every work group should have at least 3 or 4 activists, or elsethe Party won't have any voice in it. Two of them will be leaders;the group head or assistant group head. Everyone knows they are activists;they got awards at the end of each year. But if you pai ma pi withoutreally being an activist, you can also be declared an activist tempo-rarily. If you speak up in meetings, the other workers will make funof you, call you "active Liang" (Liang Jiji).

The advantages of being an activist: if you are trusted by theparty you feel happy, even though other people might hate you.Thisis a psychological feeling. You feel important, like a big man. Ifyou're not trusted by the party you're not trusted by society.  Soyou're very lonely if the party doesn't trust you. It makes you feelgreat; you talk with a deeper voice, you feel confident, strong， andstand up straight; you feel your life is peaceful， you feel proud.lEventhough the masses may play jokes on you and start rumors, and fightwith you, you know these other fools are just stupid; you know thatthe party supports you.

Activists also iget special treatment in material life.Maybeyour wife has been living in the countryside for a long time; if you arean activist for a long time maybe you can get permission for her tomove.You can get a ticket to buy a mosquito net.You can get rationtickets for many things, because money alone is not enough.

Sometimesyou get housing faster.

You are also very safe during the political movements. TThisisvery important because you dontt have to worry.1You can also becomean official later on.1Important political positions always go toactivists; head of the people's militia, head of the youth league,vice-head of the workshop. Even old activists may get promoted to bevice-head of the shop, not just young workers. There are also educationaladvantages. At that time only the activists could read cankao xiaoxiand other journals.Only they got to travel to conferences elsewhereand listen to speeches.  AAt that time activists had the only realchance togo tocollege.That was the only way to get intocollegethen--heads of work units chose gong-nong-bing students, based ontheir biaoxian.

The difficulties of being an activist: people don't like you.As an activist you have to choose between supporting the party andyour co-workers.. So there's no longer any trust or affection with theotherworkers.Nomorefriends.They treat you like the Party's dogor slave.So you feel lonely. Sometimes they cry because of all thepressures.  The workers are real tough on them.They'll say, "You asskisser, why don't you give your wife to the Party secretary to screw!"I saw this happen once, and the guy just cried. But the shop directorwould always support the activists, and try to make them feel better.Theywouldcalla meetingtotelltheworkerstostopattackingandsabotaging the activists.  SSometimes workers would fight with themover their reports about what people said in the shop.

Sometimes activists will also be criticized by the Party leadersbecause they have very high standards of conduct. Sometimes the partyleaderstakeadisliketoacertainactivist.TThen its really sad,because they don't get any support, either from the workers or theleaders.One roomate I had for a while, a group leader, he was areal activist. BEvery single night he wrote a self-criticism to sendto the party. But the party leader just laughed at him. He cried

-10-every night, always told me how hard it was to be an activist, and thatI should never try to be one.  Sometimes I really had sympathy withactivists because they had it hard.I got along really well with thisactivist who was my group leader.I would help him out and givehim soap because he was poor and had a lot of kids.But he wasstill and activist, and he sold me out once.Once I stole coalbricks from the shop and hid them in the dorm room, and he turnedmeinwhentheleadersdemandedtoknowwhohaddoneit.Buthefeltbad about it, and was too ashamed to even look at me after that, andcouldn't even speak to me. We couldn't room together after that,and he moved out. I felt sorry for him.

Some activists do give up.If something happens for them to loseface with the Party after many years, they might give up. Sometimesa worker who is an activist for many years, but whose wife nevergets into the city， or whose daughter cant find a job, or never getan apartment, sometimes will say "shit! why did I ever become anactivist. Its not worth it! I quit!"

Are there personal relationships between activists and leaders?Yes! Absolutely! They are very close. That's why the workers tellthem to give their wife to the Party leader to screw.They give giftsto the party leaders, and give small reports.There are very subtleprivate relations between activists and party leaders.  Sometimes leaderswould invite them to their house for dinner.Activists try to keeptherelationsprivatebecausetheworkersgivethemahardtimeabout it. As long as activists are trusted by the Party, these relationsare close, but if the party changes its mind about you you lose face,and then the relationship ends.Youth League (4/5/84, 1,5 hrs)

At the beginning of the CR the youth league organization wasdestroyed by the rebellion.  But by l972 when I got to the factoryit had already been restored.There were three levels of the CYL inmy factory.TheTuanzongzhibuwasatthefactorylevel.Theneach

Sometimes in a work group that has a lotshophadatuanshibu.of youth leaguers, they formed a CYL small group within the group.You had to have at least three people to make a small group.

At the top we had the secretary of the general branch of theCYL.He was a member of the factory party committee, and worked fulltime at this post.The leader in our factory was promoted up fromamong the workers in the factory.He was 35 or so when he reachedthis position.  He was a demobilized soldier who had joined the partyin the army, he had been a paizhang (lieutenant).He worked for a shortperiod in the shop and then become a helicopter cadre. He was very'red': army, party member. He was about grade l7 cadre, full timeprofessional.

There were six people, not professional， who were members of theYouthleague committee (tuan weiyuan hui）.They were workers,gotworkers salary.

They each were responsible for one function.

Onefor propaganda (weiyuan), organization (membership issues largely),baowei weiyuan (ran militia), laodong (shock brigades, volunteer labor),weisheng(inspectedcleanlinessoftheworkshop;thiswastheleastpowerful--did exercise drills and physical education, ran intramuralbasketball), and a vice-secretary (basically helped out the secretary).

-11-

They had an office in the headquarters building.They had news-papers， a tv， some flags， posters， etc.They used the office tohavemeetings in.They also had files.

Below was the youth league branch in the shop. The branch headwas not necessarily a member of the general branch committee, norwere they necessarilyY members of the party branch committee of theshop. Sometimes they were not even party members, but were at leastbackbones. There were also several members of the youth league generalbranch committee who were activists, who had committee responsibilityfor some functions as the above level.

Under thislevelwastheCYLsmallgroupof at least3 people.One was a group leader. All of these people are ordinary young workers,including the shop CYL leaders. Some party, some not, but all arebackbones. All this was after hours volunteer work. After the shiftand weekends.A real sacrifice of time.They do a lot of things buthave no functions for production.They support the party leaders andtheir policies.

Functions:1most important is propaganda.Influencetheafterhours life of the workers. Their task is to influence the politicalthought of young workers and the way theydoit is tocontrol theirafter work activities.The propaganda weiyuan, for example, ran anartistic propaganda troupe.Did plays and performances at the holidays;New Year, spring festival, party holidays.The performances weredesigned to forward the party's ideals. They were jointly sponsoredby the Union and CYL, but the propaganda weiyuan ran it.Thisartstroupe attracted young people to be involved in the spiritual life ofthe party. This is a spiritual life (jingshen shenghuo), that thepartywantspeopletohave.

There was also the Tiyu weiyuan.Every summer they organized atournament in the shops.This is another way that the youth leagueinfluences after hours life. Not really connected with politics. Butits like the party is the father and the youth league the mother, bothare in charge of your lives.If young workers really don't want to dothis kind of thing they don't have to.But if you refuse to takepart too many times, you get a bad reputation among the party andCYL leaders. !Then they call you "backward" and criticize you. Theysay you are very inactive in social and political life, which showsyour thought is backward.

Another example. On surdays the CYL organized young workersto go together to go to the park and play， or go swimming in theriver，orgotothemuseum，orlistentooldrevolutionariestellstories about the old days--the key is that they do these thingstogether. 'They don't want you to do things alone.They areafraid that otherwise you'll fall into bourgeois lifestyles.Collective life style is the point of all this, the activities themselvesare not really all that important.

Are workers interested in these activities?  1Nobodywantstodoit, they just feel they have to.They would rather help their parentsdo work around the house, or spend sunday with a girlfriend. They wouldrather have a private life. Ordinary workers don't want to go, and Idon't think even the activists really want to go, but they are justdoing it because it is expected of them.Yes a lot of people stillwent. Sometimes things like swimming aren't all that bad. But when

-12-we did go we would just show up and get it over as quickly as possibleand then go home quick.So we showed up so the youth league leadercould report that there was high attendance.It was formalistic,superficial participation.

The second function is to support the party's policies.Everymondaymorningwehadproductionmeetingsbeforework.The partysecretary would give a report, sometimes study documents from Peking.He talked about production plans，sometimes did mobilization work fora campaign,EEachgroupthenwouldtalkaboutthesemattersseparatelyin the group. Who volunteers to talk about these matters?Activists.The youth league members are models for the other workers.Theydon't really carry out party policy, they just support the partyin carrying them out.

Athird function of theCYL:tto prepare new party members.They train the party members of the future.All of these activitiesare part of the training.  Sometimes they recommend CYL activistsfor party membership.  To join the party, you have to write anapplication to the party organization. Then the party organizationsends a special person to be your 'godfather'，to talk with you atleast once a week and have you tanxin, or "give your heart to theParty". You have to tell this person all your true thoughts. Heis a party member， sometimes the head of the CYL branch.This isaperson you already know, he has perhaps recommended you for membership.Officially, he is called your rudang fazhan ren, and you are thefazhan duixiang.He is very close to you; this is the person youshould send gifts to.He is responsible for cultivating you as a partymember.This is also the time of testing (kaoyan shijian)， and it lastsabout one year, sometimes two.  Youth league organization writesrecommendation that helps out in the application process.

The CYL secretary for the factory is appointed directly by theparty secretary.1But theweiyuanofthecommitteeareelected，andarereelectedeachyear.But of course the party has to approve themembers.

Atthebeginningtheyhavesecretballotsfor alltheseweiyuan.

UsuallythegeneralsecretaryoftheCYLmustbechangedbytheparty.But there was one secretary who had a love affair with a girlwhose boyfriend was off in Hangzhou.He was then criticized as a newlyrisen bourgeois element.They knew they were doing it because thehousing is so crowded in the unit. They both lived in the unit. Hewasfromthearmy，she wasfromthecountryside but her boyfriendwas off in.college (sent by thee factory to study).Rumor said shewanted to join the party so she showed her body to the guy. Otherssaid she really loved him. When they found out what was going on,they accused him of using the party position for personal gain and helost his position, and became an ordinary worker, then he married thegirl. But they were both considered immoral, so they were ostracizedsocially and they had trouble getting a flat.(Onlyafterhewrotemany letters of self-criticism did the party finally allow them toget married, and only after he begged and cried with the party secretarydid he get housing (his wife was pregnant). This shows that "revolutionary'behaviorisallfalse--hewasthemostactiveandrevolutionaryofallof us, but he was still human and fell in love.

-13-

Every young worker should be ashamed not to be a CYL member.They should at least try tojoin.If they don't they're not a goodperson.  When someone has a bad family background you can't get in.I tried but couldn't because of my family background. There weren'ta lot of CYL members in the factory.Many wanted to join, butcouldn't. Only about 30 percent of the young workers in the factoryweremembers.1In our group of eleven, there were only two members.After they reach 35 they have to quit.But most quit before theyreach 35, it takes so much time and there are dues.Those who failto get into the party are very happy to quit the CYL.But if you quittoo early， its bad biaoxian, and might be interpreted as distrustof the party.Political Study (4/l8/84, 2 hrs.)

This too was inspired by the red army.In my factory at thetime we had two afternoons of study per week. If there was a politicalcampaign, they might stop work and study all afternoon.(Oronceayear we took more time to pick labor models, and once a year we wouldsum up our own work, biaoxian, political thought and lifestyle. Butgenerally we studiea after work from 4-6 pm.  I hear its been reducedlately to one afternoon each week at my old factory.It took placein the shop, in the work groups.1But once a week,each monday morningbefore work, we had mass meetings in the shop to listen to speechesby the party leaders or hear documents. This was called "all-factorypolitical study". Our meetings later in the week would simply repeatin discussions of our small group the same topic.

Wediscussedandrepeated what the party leaders had already said.

For example， the party secretary would tell us Monday about thewonderful experience of Dazhai: eight great points.Then later inthe owrk group we talk about the Dazhai experience and how to applyit to the imporovement of our own group and work. Generally, if thereis no campaign, we studied people's daily editorials, and red flag.We would also study Peking documents; about Dazhai, Pilin Pikong,the educational revolu-tion, etc.This was very boring because wealready heard it once on Monday morning.Now we had to go over all ofit again.

By the time the workers get to hear these documents，they'vealready discussed the same document in the party committee, amongthe party membership, among the youth league members, and shopcadres, before finally studying it among the workers.

WealsostudiedadvancedworkerslikeIronManWangofDaqing.HowcanIbecomemorelikehim?Wewouldalsocriticizeeachother.If a worker stole materials to make furniture for himself or fix hisbicycle during work hours and was caught by the leaders, he would beusedasabadexampleandcriticizedbythepartyleaderson monday morning.So in political study the workers would then

"Did you steal somethingcriticize one another in their groups.too?"Then they'd have criticism and self-criticism.They would alsohave positive models. "oh, comparing myself with Iron Man Wang; Ifeel guilty and unworthy." Or "even though I didn't steal something,I brought my kids into the factory to take a bath.!This was bourgeoisthought because they aren't covered by labor insurance." Or I wouldsometimes say, "I apologize to the party because during work I studyenglish; even though I didn't steal anything my thought was still backward."

-14-Or another would say "I feel sorry because I left the shop half anhour early yesterday." or "Although I didn't steal any state property,IdidgototheclinicyesterdayIfakingabadlegjusttogetsomemedicinal wine."

The attitudes of workers toward criticism-self criticism:  Thebackbones needed this. This is how they show how pure and honestthey are in front of the party.Even if they didn't have anybad thoughts, they would confess anyway in order to appear honest.This gave the leaders a good impression.So the backbones enjoyedthis and tried to find things to criticize themselves for.An advancedworker wanted to join the party and wrote reports to the party leader fortwo years trying to get in.

One day he was in a great hurry to goto the office of the party leader to turn in l5 yuan he found in thestreet.They said "wow! He's a real Lei Feng!" We had a big campaignto study him and praise him in the factory. He became a bid modelin the whole city.FFinally the city newspaper even sent a reporter tointerview him.1As it turned out, this was his own money he hadturned in!  How did we fine out?  His wife, who lived in the countryside,wrote a letter to complain to his leader that he hadn't been sendingmoneybackhometoherfortwomonths.When the leader read this,hefelt strange. How could this be, the guy is a model?  So then he askedthe worker, and the worker confessed "I didn't send her the moneybecause I gave the money to the party!"

There was another activist worker who would never go out withfriends because he always stayed home to study Mao's works and writethoughtsaboutMao'sworks.Theyyasked workers to write down everydaytheir thoughts about Mao's works, then they'd make you a model workerthat year.He was a model for several years in a row.So we all studiedhim in the factory as a great sutdy model. So one day this guy hada qarrel with his roomate, who said he never saw him writing allthese things and that they were fake. He gave a small report to theparty saying that he felt the guy was a fake. So the party secretaryconfronted himandasked himwhether it was true.Hefinally admittedthat he didn't do it every day.He spent every weekend, all weekenddoing it.

Another attitude toward study and criticism is:well, we haveto go along even though we hate it, we know everyone is lying， butwe have to go along to not leave bad impressions.

Whygetintroubleover this petty stuff?  I had this kind of attitude.  You had no choice.You had to say something. Even if you had a shy and quiet personality,you had to say something in the meeting.

Athirdattitudetowardstudyisthat workers whohaveanaxeto grind or don't like someone can use this opportunity to attack theirenemies.This is where the ugliness of human nature comes out.  Someonewould say, "well, Li, your self-criticism is very shallow, and that meansthat your politicalthoughtis not verydeep; youshould studyMao'sworks, you thought is bourgeois. 1Like last week, you didn't go to themuseum on the weekend, and told the group leader that your mother wassick. But I saw you in the park with your girlfriend later on.Thisshows you are backward!" Now in reality the guy is probably sayingthis because the guy he is criticizing went through the back door andgot something before he did. SSo he thinks, "you won this one, but I'llfix you next time!"  So the guy is embarassed in the meeting and has tomake a self-criticism.

-15-

Who organized political study?Usually the group leader is incharge.But sometimes one person is in charge of writing down whatworkerssay.This is not necessarily a party member or an activist,but simply one who can write.1I did this in my group.?These are theminutes of the meeting (kaihui jilu).These records were sent tothe shop director.Thisrecordshad3uses.Ifyouwantedtobeapartymember, this was proof of your political biaoxian.]Ifitwasanimportant political campaign, they might put the material in your file,because it is important to know what your attitudeis toward variouscampaigns.  And also they used it for selecting advanced workers atthe end of the year. So the leaders and security cadres will knowwhat your attitude was during the PiLin PiKong campaign.

Workers attitudes toward political study became more bored anddisrespectful during the time I was there.AfterthefalloftheGang of 4 workers criticized political study openly; said "why shouldwe waste our time with this boring stuff all the time?"  This is whythe government reduced political study to one day after l977.Sometimesin political study they just talk about anything that comes to mindnow.!They don't always do political study now as they did before. Womentalk about kindergarten, workers talk about news.Theydon'trefu-seto go now， but they're just more lax in the meetings.SSo they watch theclock very carefully， and when the time is up they tell the groupleader and he says "oK, suanle!"  And then they head out the door.But never before the Gang of 4 fell did this happen.And they stillthink politicalstudyisimportant;at least sitdownandtalkoncea week in the group, because after all there is still the four moderniza-tions.Dang'an

They begin in junior middle school. I actually saw them when Iwas a teacher. Already junior ms students have at least two pagesin their files.When workers start work they already have a fulldang'an.They can never see it.It is a state secret;only the securitydepartment caders have right to see themn (personnel department wasmerged with security in my unit).

Only3kindsofpeoplecantouchthedang'an.The party secretarycan see it, but the shop director can't. SShopdirectorscanonlygivereports to the factory party secretary, who decides whether to put thematerial in.  Any of the party committee members can see the dang'anif they have an official reason.(Otherwise its toosecret.SSecond,thesecretaryinthebaoweirenshikecanseeit.These people arehighly trusted by the party because they have to keep quiet about whatthey see.Theywouldlosetheirjobiftheyrevealedinformation.Third, the cadres in the security bureau or police who are investigatingyou can see them upon orders.

I never saw my own dang'an.SohowdoIknowwhatisinit?WellI saw the ones for the junior high school students I taught, so I canguess what's in mine.Mymother was a rightist inl957，rehabilitatedin1979.They showed the familythe materials they were throwing out, andthey burned the material relating to it; that's what being rehabilitatedmeans.My mom said she couldn't believe the things that were in herdang'an.Her criticisms of the party then were very mild, really;you can read about them in my book.SShe told me in 1979 they had5 notebooks worth of material on her that was being thrown out.All

-16-the things that people said about her in criticism meetings, her self-criticism,andtheauthorities'investigationabout her background.They had material on who her friends were, who she visited duringdifferent campaigns, how many times she had visited them, theparty's judgment of her biaoxian in each campaign.This is whypeople always pay attention to political study; you have to be concernedabout your dang'an.It seems to me that the party's most powerfulweapon against the people is the dang'an.TThe leaders commonlywarned workers that if they didn't shape up they'd put a reportin their dossier.

Generally if you criticize yourself or just are criticizedin the small group, nothing is put in your file.FBut if you arecriticized at a higher level they do put it in your file.'This is whyso many rebel groups attacked the offices during the CR--they werereallyafter thedang'an，Theywantedtoburnthedang'an.TThiswasthe main reason why rebels were iimprisoned, even executed after theCR--for stealing and destroying the dang'an.

The party keeps the dang'an secret because they are full of lies.People would get very angry,I think， if they could see what's intheir files.  So the party must keep them completely secret. People areconcerned about their dang'an because their units controlled everything--housing, travel, promotions, salary, residence of family members. If youwant to visit another city, you need permission from the unit. Ifyou have bad material in your file, then they might not be willing tolet you travel, because you're suspect. "oh, I know why you wantto go there; you have a grandfather there who's an old landlord!

Youshould cut off ties with these bad elements!"

Thepersonneldepartmentisinchargeofthedang'an.Thatdoesnotmean they just watch over the files all day. It also means they haveto say something if the police investigate you.  They are also incharge of writing an approval of you if you are going to be transferedormove.Theywritesimplesummarylettersimsimplelanguagethatcharacterizes the content of thefile.1Files are kept under combinationlock.  A second job was to grasp class struggle.If you were sent to dolabor reform the personnelL department gives them information on yourbackground and case.Also if there is any stealing in the factory, theytry to find out who did it。If there are counter-revolutionary graffitiwritten on the wall, like "Down with Mao", they investigate that.Theywould investigate by going through the dang'an and cross-examiningallthebadelementsfirst.These people know all the workers' materials.They know the good ones, middling, and bad ones, and the crazy ones.I know about these things not from experience but because people whowerecross-examined told me about it.

For example, a worker stole some steel rods.The baowei ke peoplewarnedeverybodytotellthemtheywantedaconfession，orthey'dcallin the police. Then they'd launch an investigation.They'd call inactivists and ask their opinion, they would try to talk to other workersto see if they knew.Then the good workers would be called in to bequestioned.  They would try to manipulate them:  "This is when the partyshows its trust in you.  Do you want to join the party?  Tell us, whodid it? Who do you think did it?"

The security department also did security guard duty. Theyespecially had to patrol the stores, especially the lumber which wasvery scarce.

-17-

Security departments are also in charge of recruiting workers forthe PLA. Every year about 5 workers joined.

There are very few personnel in the security department. Inour factory, there are three full-time cadres, all of them weredemobilized soldiers with military training and military weaponsskill.They knew how to use cameras, analyze footprints, etc.Basically they should be trusted by the Party.

Onecadre,Mr.Liuinourfactory'ssecuritydepartmentwasvery mean to workers, Once he had an affair witb a married woman in thefactory dormitory， where he slept with her.He was so dumb he forgotthat everyone in the factory is watching one another.Of courseeveryone knew what was going on.The neighbors saw.  He forgot thateverybody is always watching. ? The neighbors heard them breathinghard and moaning at night, and then got up early to see who cameout of her flat in the morning, since they knew her husband wasliving elsewhere.  He was reported, criticized by the party leaders,and eventually he went to the farm himself.Factions(4/23/84,2hrs)

There are really two kinds of factions. One has to do with politics,asecondwithChinesetraditions.Thesecondkindexistedbefore theCR and even before 1949.  Before 1949 there was the baotou (gang boss)whoraneverythinginthefactory.Buttheinfluenceofthesystemstill exists.People are accustomed to following powerful individuals.In our factory there were only a few shifu (masters) that are well knownby all.We called them Zhang Shifu, Li Shifu, and so forth. Theseare the real leaders among the workers, and they're not appointed bythe party. Workers follow them and admire them naturally.Why?They are fairly old, usually around 60. Their image is better ifthey are old. Second, their salary rank is higher than ordinaryworkers. So they have good skill level. And younger workers admirethem.Theydon'talwaysworkthathardbuttheyknowhowtodothingsand other workers are always asking their advice.

When the workers had dahui, these were the people who weretrusted to hold the money.These guys really talked about yiqi.They used yiqi to gain support and help others.EHehelpedthemout,people sought his help and did things in return.TThey also have highmorality (daode) and a lot of prestige. He will be listened to byall the owrkers.BHe helped mediate family problems, gave advice andso forth. If workers are dissatisfied with things, like if theywant more money for the gaowen fei, this is the guy they talk to andask to talk to party leaders; they never ask the group leaders orparty secretaries.The party leaders will listen to these guys more;in fact they were a little afraid of these guys because they had so muchinfluence among the workers.These old shifu are not party members andthey don't care about position.Theydon'tworryaboutbeingcriticizedby party members; they know they have support among the workers becauseof their morality. I know this because I was a follower of Liu Shifuin my shop.

These guys aren't afraid of the party leaders because they have theknowledge and skill needed to carry out tasks.The party needs them.Party members can make slogans, but these skilled workers are neededtogettheworkdone.They also have daode; the workers really respectand trust them. If the party member tells a worker he should stopdrinking and be nice to his wife, workers won't listen to him becausethey don't trust him. But the workers trust and respect the Lao Shifu

-18-andwilllistentothem.The Lao Shifu-worker relationship(shituguanxi) is more important than the party-worker relationship.!Thisis real yiqi.!The Lao Shifu takes care of the young single workersinthedorm;invitesthemtohishometoeatanddrinkwineontheholidays.  I was smart; so I gave my shifu gifts at these occassions.There are very close relations between these old shifu and youngworkers.Activists have shifu the first three years, but not alwaysthat close after that because the shifu are afraid the activists willreport onthem.1But sometimes shifu can get informationfrom theirformer apprentices who are activists about a campaign or a youthleague or party meeting, and so they are very well informed about things.

The second reason party leaders are a little afraid of them isbecause of their moral authority.Theshifu hasthis authority becausehe takes care of young workers like a father.Theytakecareoftheirtudi. You stand up for each other in meetingssandinfrontofleaders.For example， if young worker is in trouble for leaving early and thenlater quarrels with his group leader over it, the shifu will alwayshelphis workerout.He'llrushinandsay"suanle! suanle!,"calmthe leader down, give him a cigarette, tell him to sit dowm and relax.Then he'll say something that backs up the worker's story, and say"If you want to criticize someone, criticize me."  It doesn't matter ifwhat the work said was true or not--maybe the worker had been offgambling, but he'll still bakc up your story, and maybe ask you laterwhereyou'dreallybeen.So workers naturally support these guys.

Generally there are about 3 or so old shifu in a shop.Afterthe 3 year apprenticeship they usually still have yiqi.Most ofthem continue the relationship.Shifu will even introduce you togirls.My shifu tried to introduce me to a girl once.He alsothought it: was stupid for me to want to go to college. He advisedagainst it and it was kind of a betrayal on my part for me not totake his advice.But when it looked like the factory cadres wouldn'tallow me to go to college, and criticized me for wanting to go, theshifu stood up for me and argued for my case, saying "why don't youlet him go?He's really smart!"‘Later when I got married severalyears later, my shifu was outraged when I didn't invite him to thewedding ceremony, but only to the reception. He broke relationswithmeoverthat.

These shifu really controlled workers, and reallycouldinfluencetheir followers.  Workers will do anythingg their shifu says, but notnecessarily for the party leader.So the party leaders are extremelyrespectful and polite to the shifu, always asking for their opinionsand so forth. Shifu are like the gentry of the factory.

Different shifu had different followers.They each had their ownfaction.A good party secretary knows what the factional situationis, uses one faction against the other in order to rule them.1Ifyouknow the factions and you're smart you can control them this way.

There are conflicts among the shifu factions.Therearetechnicalcompetitions.Each shifu has pride in his technical abilityandhisability to lead his workers, and sometimes they try to outdoeachotherin quality of work or abilitytodoatask.Theycheckeachother'sworkorabilitytodosomethingwell.They criticize the other if

They are also very mindful of their pay levels.its done poorly.Grade6,7or8makesadifferencetotthem, so the shifu each try toshow up the others; they are jealous of each other's ranking.The

-19-higheroneswanttodemonstratetheirability，andtheyoungeroneswant to prove that they can do things as well as the higher grade ones.My factory was small, there were only1about5-6shifuinthewholeplant, and they had lots of followers.

When there are quarrels between tudi, sometimes the shifu aredrawn in. Since they emphasize yiqi with each other, if you attackatudiyouattack themianzioftheshifu.Oftenthereisdiscordamong the shifu because of their tudi.

If your shifu becomes a party memer (one of the shifu in myfactory became a member)， the shifu then gets a lot of power becausehe can use the powers of the party to help out his followers.?Thenothers will be jealous of the party member shifu.Also some shifumay have party members as followers, and this is a source of powerandinformation.

Myshifuhadabout 7-8closefollowers.That wasalot.Notall shifu had followers.Some came from outside the plant and neverbuilt up a following.In this case prople from outside may form afaction against the shifu groups.?They opposed each other.  Theworkers transfered in had built up no feelings with the shifu. Theydidn't learn their trade in the plant.

There are also political factions.Thisapplied duringthe CRonly. There was the conservative and rebel faction in my factory.The baohuang pai wasformed bythe activists and modelworkers andwere a very small group.  They defended party leaders.Butthiswasalso related to the traditional factions described already. In myshop, Zhang Shifu (the party member) became involved in the baohuangfaction.He was in the party and loved the party.lLiuShifudislikedhim for this, they had conflicts from before the CR. When ZhangShifu became powerful and controlled the shop in the CR, he could giveorders to Liu Shifu and show him up.It made him mad.VWhenthebaohuangfaction lost Mao's support，Liu Shifu then supported the zaofanfaction to get back at Zhang.1Liu was smart; he didn't join himself,but all his tudi joined, and he gave them advice on what to do.That'show he got back and zhang Shifu.So the political factions got mixedup with the traditional factions.

There was also Tian Shifu, the head of the Zhuzhou pai.TThiswas a group of workers transfered from the Zhuzhou chemical plant.They all stuck together under Tian.  People don't use the term paiwhen talking about these things, they just refer to people with thecharacterde.lPeople are Liu Shifu de (ren). People use verycommon language in talking about these things.· De refers to factionalties in common language.

In the CR, the zaofan faction was made up of three kinds of people:l) people oppressed by the leaders previously and who didn't like theparty; 2) people with bad class background or who had made mistakes,people whoihad bad biaoxian.  Usually it was the people with bad classbackground who were the leaders.?They got shot later. 3) Youngworkers.They were so young they didn't know anything.TThey justfollowedtheshifuandothersanddidn'thaveanyrealreasontofollowthem.Alotofthemjustdiditfor fun.Butthemostimportantthing about the zaofan pai is that they were unhappy with the leadershipand didn't like their followers who always reported on them.

描述：

