id: e0fd831e5a
标题：Hong Kong Interviews: Informant No. 28
日期：1980-4-9
是否是时间段：false
作者：Andrew G. Walder
来源：
标签：文章
书籍：Hong Kong Interviews: Informant No. 28
书籍作者：Andrew G. Walder

正文：
INFORMANT NO.28

PERSONAL DATAAge:45

Sex: Female

University graduate (Czech)Education:

20Total Years Relevant Experience:Last Year of Relevant Experience: 1978

Year Left China: 1978Initial Immigration Status:1LegalNative Place/overseas Connections:

unknownClass Background/Political Designation:

unknown

OCCUPATIONAL HISTORY SUMMARYPositions Held:  l) Translator, Petroleum Design Institute, Fushun,

1959-61, 1962-632) Language Teacher, Cadre School, Petroleum Ministry,

Peking, 1961-62 (six months)3）Chemical Fibres Textile Plant, Tianjin, l963-78

a) Translator, Experts 0ffice, 1963-64b)Staff, Equipment Department, 1964-66c)Worker, Weaving Shop, 1967-72

d）Staff, Equipment Department, 1972-78Administrative Level of Work Unit/(No. of employees):

1)Ministry/ (unknown)

3) Ministry, later Municipal/(2000)Experience in Full-time Manual Labor (for non-worker occupations):

woker in weaving shop, 1967-72

TOTAL HOURS:  2.5APPOINTMENTS:

PAGES TEXT:

31No.28Occupational History

(4/9/80, 2.5 hrs.)

The informant attended Peking University from l955-59, in the RussianDepartment.ShestudiedCzech.She studied at Peking U. for one year, thenbecause of a reorganization of the educational system, the Polish and Czechcourses were sent to the Peking Foreign Languages Institute.TThis wasbecause they still studied Russian Literature in the University, but onlystudied the languages of Polish and Czech.

She graduated from the ForeignLanguages Institute in l959.

She was then assigned to the Petroleum Ministry in Peking, under thestate council.:SheworkedinthePetroleum DesigningJ Institite under theMinistry--it was located in Fushun, Liaoning Province.

She worked here forover two years, until l961.She did translation work.

Therewerecontractswith Czechoslovakia for coal oil processing plant equipment. The Czechswere handling the entire operation from planning to investment, and herjob was to translate Czech materials into Chinese.There were severaldepartments in the Institute for designing different products.There wereover 2o Czech experts attached to the Institute, and she also did inierpretingwork when the Czech experts met and discussed things with the Chinese tech-nicians.

When she was transfered in l96l, the Czech project still was notcompleted，butbecausee they discovered DaQing oilfields, they decided notto build the symthetic oil plant.

So she was transfered back to the cadreschool of the Petroleum Ministry.It was here that they trained adminstrativecadres in business. sShe taught Czech classes to cadres from plants or unitswhich had Czech experts.After 6 months she stopped teaching because the3 lean years had begun, and they started a readjustment policy (tiaozheng,gonggu， chongshi， tigao).They ended up cancelling plans to build Czech-assisted plants, so the demand for Czech language training went dowm.

Thenshe was sent back to the Fushun Designing Institute to do translation work.

In l963, she was transfered to a chemical fibres plant in Tianjin.It was under the Ministry of the Chemical Industry. and had about 2000employees. It was also under Tianjin Municipal leadership.It had aspecial status because it was built by Czechs, and was the first of its kind.She did translation work here for the lo+ Czech experts--technicians andengineers--who were there to install equipment.

She was attached to theplant's 'experts office' (zhuanjia bangongshi).

In October l964, she was transfered to the equipment department of theplant, where she continued to do translation work, only this time shedid not interpret, but translated blueprints and technical drawings intoChinese.:Starting in 1966, she began to do manual labor in the shops.The purpose of this was to get the intellectual class in closer contactwith the workers, and to remold their ideological thought.She worked inthe maintenance group (baoquan zu) after a short stint initially as amachine tender (dang che).The first required her to clean the machineswhile the second required her to watch the looms in the weaving shop.

Thisstarted in l967 and she worked full-time in the shops until 1972.

In l972, she returned to the equipment department, but was no longera translator, since the Czechs were long gone.

So she did ordinary adminis-trative staff work.

She took careof the files on the machinery andequipment,did a little work on wages.This was simple office work.She continued todo this until she emigrated to Hong Kong legally in March l978.

-1-Wages

She was paid according to translator's wage scale. When she firstgraduated she got 46. She was a 'practicing' (jianxi) translator for herfirst year, then 'turned regular' (zhuanzheng), and given 55.Not untilNovember l977 was she given a raise to 62¥, and raised a grade. They usuallydidn't talk about grade scale numbers, just the money. But it was a l6-gradescale, with l6 being the lowest (It sounds like the technical cadre scale,but she says it was not called by that name).Bonuses

When she was in the factory, there were no bonuses, they had alreadybeen cancelled.  But they had the equivalent, called supplementary wages(fujia gongzi).}Previously, while she worked in the designing institute,they had yearly bonuses, but very limited ones, only about 2o¥ or soat the end of each year.The bonuses before the CR were divided up into3 grades--5, 7, 9--and were assessed within small groups each quarter.Most important was political showing (biaoxian), and unity with coworkers.During and after the CR, because of factional conflict, there was no wayto appraise, so they gave all workers 4¥ per month, and staff and cadresgot 3¥.Temporary Workers

These were women from the neighborhoods, also some youth who hadstayed in the cities.They were organized by the resident's committees.They also had a few temporary workers from the villages. They did worklike moving and transport..

They were paid about as much as regularworkers, and some were paid more, according to their skill level. Theystill had the system, unchanged, after the CR, and even had temporaryworkers in the plant duringithe CR. The only change came as productionanddemandfor labor changed.Firings, Discipline

There was never any punishments or firings of any sort for workbehavior.  You could be punished, however, for causingaan accident.  Areport would be written up and put in a file. But for other problems,like political ones, you could be expelled. No one was ever expelledor punished in her plant for other than political mistakes. Politicalpunishments included entering material onto files, which influencedyour future, and you also could be struggled at a meeting.If you breakthe law, you can be dealt with by the legal system. For both legal andpolitical mistakes, you can end up in labor reform in a farm, mine, orfactory.Cultural Revolution

The "power holders" (dang quan pai) were cadres at the plant directorlevel and above.They could not join mass factions.But middle-levelcadres and below could participate in mass organizations. AAmongthemasses,there were two factions.They differed over opinions toward particularleaders and issues. The faction which tended to be more lenient towardcadres were called the conservatives.Theymight only pick onone or twovice-directors out of a total of one plant director and five vice-directors.The rebel faction might support other leaders, and want to get rid of 2others.The ones they actually wanted to attack were determined by a complexweb of personal relations.Who ended up being called rebels and who wereconservatives depended on who got support from above.The conservativescriticized those the rebels criticized, and vice-versa.

-2~

Political viewpoints determined whether you would join one factionor another， not just age.There were youth in both factions, even thoughthere were more among the rebels.AAt the beginning of the CR, you couldrea-ly see that the party committee no longer had any organizational life.MaohadalreadyI said "bombard the headquarters" when he approved of wall-posters, and everyone knew this meant Liu Shaoqi and the party committees.

The plant stopped production for only brief periods at a time, fora few days. Generally tthey could not stop because it was a 3 shift system

So they just couldn't stop.Butand required a balance of production.often things slowed or stopped. Then people would just work on their ownthings--the women workers (over half of the workforce) would knit sweaters,etc.

Mostoftheecadresatthedepartmentheadlevelandabovestoodasideand they were all1 sent down to do manual labor.AAs the party cadre policywass implemented, some came back fairly early， some later.Almost allcadresat the plant director level stood aside, including the party secretary.Almost all the office workers didat least some manual labor during theperiod.  The administrative structure shrunk.

At the time the revolutionary committee was established, they combinedall the departments into a few small departments, using a fraction of theoriginal number of people.  Gradually the departments were re-established,one by one, as the cadre policy was implemented.:So by 1972-73 the originalstructure was completelyrestored.

The Revolutionary Committee went through some changes.TThey had onefrom l967-72, made up mostly of leaders from the factions and PLA cadres.After l972 its composition changed, they restored the administrative structure,and got rid of former faction leaders.The initial head of the RC was aPLA representative who was sent in.He took over the jobs of the partysecretary, who had stood aside.There were also several middle-level cadres(shop directors), a former plant director, and leaders of the factions.The PLA member never left.But in l972 there was a movement against "May16 elements" where a number of the former leaders from the rebel factionon the RC were removed for opposing the Party and Army leadership.Theywere replaced by rehabilitated cadres, and also a number of plant directorsand party secretaries were transfered in and assumed leadership positionsat that time.

The head and vice-head of the revolutionarycommitteewereequivalentto the previous plant directors, and the head was simultaneously partysecretary.The young people, the former factional representatives, hadno experience, and knew nothing about management of a factory.ProductionGroup Management

They had a group leader, plus several worker 'yuan', such as one whohandled wage calculations, propaganda, quality, safety, etc.She doesn'tremember all the rest. But they had this system from the time she wassent down right up to the time she was sent back to the offices.They heldmeetings periodically, and cooperated in meeting quotas.Therewereabout10 workers in the group.(Only workers could be'yuan', not the cadreswho had been sent down, like herself.TThese people were elected democratically:not by secret ballot, but by general discussion. 1New elections were heldevery year, but if people did a good job they would usually be re-electedandcontinue.

After l976, the main difference was that the management system wasconsolidated, as before the CR. There were no elections of shop directors,they were still appointed from above.

Iw-

描述：

