id: 4ca39e1132
标题：Hong Kong Interviews: Informant No. 31
日期：1980-4-5,1980-4-9,1980-4-12
是否是时间段：false
作者：Andrew G. Walder
来源：
标签：文章
书籍：Hong Kong Interviews: Informant No. 31
书籍作者：Andrew G. Walder

正文：
INFORMANT NO. 31PERSONAL DATA

Sex: MaleAge:40

Industrial College graduate (machine technology)Education:

19Total Years Relevant Experience:

Year Left China: 1979Last Year of Relevant Experience: 1979Initial Immigration Status: Legal

Tianjin native/os relativesNativePlace/OverseasConnections:Class Background/Political Designation:

capitalist

OCCUPATIONALHISTORYSUMMARYPositions Held: l) Staff Technician, Electrical Equipment Department,

Tianjin #1 Machine Building Bureau, 1961-67, 1973-792) Worker, Hot Forging Workshop, Machine Building Plant,

Tianjin, 1967-73Administrative Level of Work Unit/(No. of employees):

1) Municipal/(400)

2) Municipal/(2000)Experience in Full-time Manual Labor (for non-worker occupations):

worker in hot forging workshop, 1967-73APPOINTMENTS:3

PAGES TEXT:TOTAL HOURS:7

>No. 31Occupational History (4/5/80, 2.75 hrs.)

The informant is a former resident of Tianjin, son of a capitalist, anda relative of Wang Guang-mei. He worked in Tianjin's industrial system froml962-l979. He studied machine technology at an industrial college for 4 years,graduating in 1961. AAfter graduation he was assigned to work at the Tianjin#l Municipal Machine-Building Bureau as a technician in their electricalequipment department (dongli shebei ke). The companiessunder thisbureauwould send requests for major repairs up to his office.

Hisjobwastolookover the applications, investigate the plant's equipment in question anddecide what measures needed to be taken, and how much the renovation willcost, and how long the factory should be permitted to stop production inorder to finish the repairs.This was for large capital equipment.

Enter-prises needed to report to the Bureau to get permission for all majoroverhauls.

He. did this kind of work until l967, when he was sent down to a factorywithin this system.There were over 2ooo workers in this machine-buildingfactory which manufactured heavy machinery.  He worked in a hot-pressforging workshop (reduanya chejian)， where the production process was toforge parts for heavy machinery. He worked in a production group as anordinary worker.He operated a forging press (duanya ji).

In l973, when they began to implement the Party's cadre policy, hereturned to his previous work in the electrical equipment department of

The majorthecitybureau.From 1973 until July 1979 he did this work.difference from before the CR was that he went down personally to inspectmachinery in the factories more often.  He came to Hong Kong legally.Wages

The first year after graduation he got 46￥ per month, as was nationalpolicy for university graduates.  He had no fixed wage grade during thisyear.lAfter one year, he was given a raise to 55¥. Although he was atechnician, since he worked in the bureau he was assigned to the adminis-trative cadre scale, grade 21.

Up until l978 he got no raise, and his wages did not change during theperiod when he was in the factory.

They decided who would be raised thistime according to years of service and current wage level.1If you startedbefore l958 and were not grade 4 (worker), they would raise you to grade 4.If you started from 1958-64 and were not yet grade 3, they would raise you tothat level. They also had a provision, aside from these stipulations, forothers to be raised according to their work contributions and skill levels.This was about 20% of all those remaining.1Also if people had been promotedbefore to leading positions without being given raises:（whichwascommon），they would adjust their salaries accordingly.

Within the bureau, they sent dowm targets for the percentage of peoplewho could be raised.Then they would hold meetings in the offices toappraise.They alsowould readjust the wagesof those who had been raisedfrom the company and enterprises during the past decade. TThere were a lotof these.

As he remembers, there were national wage readjustments in 1956, l963,l972 or thereabouts, for a small number of workers, l978, and one whichbegan in l979 around the time he left for Hong Kong.Bonuses

They had bonuses before the cultural revolution in the bureau offices,basicallyafixedsum,fairlyequal, and tied to attendance.They alsohad

-1-a bonus for loo% attendance.

There was no bonus system in his factory from l967-73, when it wasreplaced by a supplementary wage.These were much lower than the bonusesworkers got before.They got lo¥ per month, everyone, and this was higherthan in most other factories.  All the workers and staff got it every month.Administrative cadres did not get them, but technical cadres did.Temporary.andContract Labor

They had these kinds of workers during the cultural revolution andafterwards in his enterprise.

They did irregular kinds of work--moving,

They came both from the street committees, and contractconstruction.workers came from the communes.If you wanted to hire them, you had tonotify the labor bureau of the cityto get the temporary workers.Theywouldnotifythestreetstoarrangee for the workers.

Ifyouwantedaconstruction team from a commune the plant would send people out to searchfor them directly.

They can't raise the labor payroll so they havetoget temporaries, becausee the bank won't allow you to pay unless the amountof wages fits the number of workers specified in the plan.

In l972 there was a national document which specified that temporaryworkers be turned into permanent ones. Not all of them were given perma-nent status.Only those who had worked there a full year.But somewere not willing--they wanted money and not fringe benefits.Temporaryworkers in his factory got between 1.57¥ and l.99¥ per day.This was betweengrade 3 to grade 5 worker's salary.1Usually if you were made a reguiurworker, you would be set at grade 2, 39¥, and if you had technical skills youwould be set at grade 3, 43￥.Of course these figures differed by industry.The standard contract for all temporary workers was 3 months. You couldnot fire them whenever you wanted, you just waited until the contract expiredand then did not renew.Discipline, Firings

If one's work is bad, usually there is no punishment, they just giveyou education. 1If one is expelled from the plant, this is because you haveviolated state laws--like the purposeful sabotage of production, or assaulton other people.

Then you would be dealt with bythesecuritydepartmentand removed from the plant.1Usually the handling of problems was through

For stealing, which waseducation--they hold a meetinggtocriticizeyou.quite common after the CR, you could get criticized, or you could havea warning (jing gao) written into your file, which disqualifies you from abonus for a period of time.This also stays on your permanent record.Stealing was an important part of what they called 'anarchism'.(Generallypunishments were divided into two sorts:

'criminal sanctions' (xingshichufen), and 'administrative sanctions' (xingzheng (chufen). The first wasconnected with the legal system and the public security bureau, the second

The first was more serious because itwasinternaltotheenterprise.involved expulsion from the factory and labor reform.

Thesecondinvolvedvarious warnings, docking of bonuses, etc.

The prevalent attitude in the l970s was that you would get the sameamount of money whether you worked hard or not， so why bother?They triedtc stimulate worker enthusiasm with slogans but it didn't work.Workerattendance slipped, they would leave early. sneak off during work hours,would steal, work slowly.

It was very serious. Worker enthusiasm andwork discipline was much worse in the l970s than in the early l960s.

But problems in fact began earlier, after the anti-rightist campaign

With each political campaign workers became less enthusiastic.in 1957.

-2-The purpose of the political campaigns was to stimulate production, butthe effect was just the reverse.Whentheyranallthesecampaignstheyforgot that it is in a worker's nature to work, not to study Marxism-Leninism and discuss, criticize.The Tianjin #l Machine-Building Bureau(4/9/80, 2.25 hrs.)

The municipal bureau was under the #l Machine-Building Ministry inPeking, which gave it production plans, and quotas.

It gives directionson new products, arranges supplies of materials and parts. FBelowthe bureau were 5 companies (gongsi), an electrical machinery company;a machine tools company, a machine tool repair company, and agriculturalmachinery company, and a machinery transport company.

The bureau had several administrative departments, which had respon-sibilities , as he describess it， of taking orders from above and relayingthem below.There were over 4oo employees in his bureau offices.  Produc-tion matters were led by the Ministry, while administrative matters were ledby the municipal government. This was what was meant by 'dual leadership'(shuangceng lingdao)and 'difang guoying' (local state management).

Administrative matters led by the city include; l) personnel transfers,changes, labor force matters, 2) political work under the leadership of the

the cityIcan also make demandsparty committee, campaigns, movements, 3)for tractors for their suburban communes, and machines for public facilities.This amounts to a small proportion of the plan, but not a negligible one.

The bureau protects itself against these local demands for productiveoutput by keeping excesses over the quota of output and holding on to itin order to a) trade with other units for needed materials, parts, andproducts; b) reporting along with the next quarter's output, in case itcame up short.This practice has no special name.Everyone knows aboutit， but they don't talk about it， but still everyone does it.If you haveto put a name on it, you could just say that it is considered a "flexible"(linghuo) method of management.

The bureau was divided into several departments.Technology (jishu),Technical Planning (gongyi), Electrical Equipment, Labor and Wages,Safety (anquan jishu), Statistics (tongji), Security, (baowei), PoliticalWork (zhenggong), Health (baojian).

Each of these departments had corres-ponding relations with their counterparts at the company and enterpriselevel. ?There was also a Union office, and an 'external affairs' office(nuanwai bangongshi), which assists other areas in the surrounding countieswith technicians and equipment. It also sometimes helps other areas ofthecountryandinsomecasesforeigncountries.The department was ledby a Party Committee, a Bureau Head, and 3 assistant Bureau Heads.Beforethe CR the bureau head was also the Party Secretary.1Mostofthevice-headswere party members.Post-CR Administrative Changes in the Bureau

After the cultural revolution, several departments were combined intoone, and some were abolished. The union department was abolished, theTechnology, Technical Planning, and Electrical Equipment Departments wereall combined into one.The office of the Bureau Head was changed intoa Revolutionary Committee. The safety and health departments were combinedinto one.

About 5o% of the personnel were sent down to "strengthen basic-levelleadership", and to engage in production.The leaders of the bureau wentto a May7cadre school, while the staff almost always went to factoriesto become workers. New cadres, especially younger ones who were politicallyactive and had good class backgrounds, moved up into the bureau offices.

13-But they lacked expert knowledge.

They came from the companies and enter-prises, and most were originally workers.These people simply didn'tunderstand technical matters, the plan, how to implement it.1Many kindsof work simply stopped.

An example of the kinds of problems caused:

During one year therewas a severe drought.?The bureau decided that it needed to produce waterpumps fast to serve the local farmers.But they didn't know which factory tosend the order to, and tried first the machine tool company.

They tried tosay it was a political responsibility to produce these pumps.Then theydecided later that the machine tools company was an inappropriate choice,so they went to the agricultural machine company. AAfter wasting a lotof time this way, trying to decide who could produce these pumps, theagricultural machine company finally agreed to produce them, but too lateto help the drought.

Anotherexample:In l969, during the period when they were tense aboutwar with the USSR, the party raised the slogan "move industry to the thirdline".So they decided to build a new，:large iron plant in a small countytown in Hebei called She Xian （涉 具. ), in the far southwest corner of theprovince.But the production leadership group of the bureau didn't thinkabout water supply, transport costs required to move materials in and out.All the different factories in Tianjin were supposed to donate equipment,supplies, machines, and transfer workers for the project.They triedto build this plant for 9 years.

It never produced much. ?They couldn'tget enough water, transportation links were poor, and there were no minesnearby for raw materials (coal and ore).

There was a rail line, but norolling stock for the job.:Finally, in l978, Tianjin City gave up on theplant and turned the whole thing over to Hebei province metallurgy bureau.This huge plant with the best equipment was achieving the output of a smallplant. It lost money each year, and when they planned every year theygave the enterprise a target for loss, not profit.Cultural Revolution

The bureau had 2 factions, formed from among

Machinery Bureau:the unit's own personnel.!They had conservatives and rebels.The differen-ces between the factions were over attitudes toward the leading bureaucadres and municipal leaders.Why did people join factions?Patrioticreasons.People wanted to make a contribution to the nation.The 'l6 points'and other documents told the people that there was a group of capitalistroaders in the party, and that they wanted to drag them out.

There were no real differences in the membership composition of eachfaction. Youth were in both, and all had good class backgrounds.iFor example,one group in Peking, the Lian Dong （耳 云力)， was an organization of thesons and daughters of higher level cadres--He Long'ssandChenYi'schildren.were members.This organization was conservative.

About 20-30% of the staff did not participate in the movement. rThiswas because their class backgrounds were bad.They were high level technicianswhich wasn't very good to start with, in addition to having historical problemsdue to their parentage.

Therewere

They were the targets of the movement.all kinds of people who pulled down--both staff with historical backgroundproblems and leading cadres accused of being 'capitalist roaders'.?They were

"Technical authorities"dragged out, struggled, and put in 'cowsheds'.were also criticized.

They put hats on them during struggle meetings, beat them, made themrecite things. Later, they were made to sweep floors, and went through regularrituals where they apologized to Mao and the masses.There were quite a few

-4-suicides (jumped in the river), and also some people who were beaten to death.

He says he saw the handwriting on the wall, made a self-confessionof his own background, making as full a self-examination as possible,thendemandedtobesentdownn to do manual labor and be reeducated.Afterhe got to the factory, he demanded to be sent to the most bitter type oflabor. He was able to avoid being struggled.

He was sent down toa heavymachinery factory in the electrical machinery company.

(4/12/80, 2 hrs.)In the Enterprise:

He went to a factory that produced heavy machinery,Hot Forging Presses (reya ji).There were over 20o0 workers there.AAtthetime he arrived in the factory in l967, they had not yet formed the revolu-tionary committee, and had no one really1 running the place.In reality， thetwo faction's leaders were running things.Theplant leadersweresupposedtokeep production up inthe midst of revolution,but couldn't--theywereparalyzed (tanhuan).

At the time he arrived, he went straight to the shop.They came to thefactory 6 days a week, but the employees did little actual work.Theywrote wallposters, held meetings, struggled cadres, and left with theirfaction members to participate in outside activities.TThe former leadingcadres were put in a cowshed if they had bad class backgrounds, as were someworkers who, it had been discovered, had bad class backgroundsSorhistorical

Those in the leadingproblems like having been KMT soldiers or policemen.group that had good class backgrounds--particularly workers and poor uid lower-middle peasants, were allowed to keeptheir positions, but didn't reallyhave any power(youming wu quan). By that time the faction leaders wererunning things.

The plant director had been head of the CYL before l958 (all-China isthe implication), but because of illicit sexual affairs he was sent downto be plant director/partyI secretary.

In the CR the rebels went after him,found out his past, called him one of Liu's henchmen and a member of thecapitalist headquarters, and struggled him. One evening the man was secretlytaken away by thee conservative faction in the plant who wanted to protecthim, and relying on connections with the city-wide conservative organization,

Afterwards he was putput him on a planeto Shanghai, and protected him.in a position as an advisor to the Shanghai Municipal Production leadershipdepartment (Shanghai Shi Shengchan Zhihui Bu), which was under the revolu-

(informant writes the firsttionary committee. His name was 马 文 林character incorrectly).

The head of the Tianjin conservative faction was named 林 3 予页Duringg the establishment of the revolutionary committee in Tianjin, hebecame the head of the union (gongdai hui), which replaced the old union(gonghui) in the revolutionary committee setup.?They also had a nongdaihuifor peasants and a'xuedaihui for students. (Gongdaihui could perhaps betranslated as workers committee). In l97o he was sent to be the leader ofthe new iron and steel plant in She Xian referred to in the previous inter-view.In l973, when they revived the union (gonghui)， he returned to beChairman of the ?Tianjin Municipal Union.In l975 he was transfered to bethe head of the Tianjin Municipal Earthquake Bureau--of course he had notrainingg in this, but heads of organizations in China rarely have suchexpertise, they don't need it.At the end of l977, he was arrested, in partbecause of activities in armed struggle during the CR,and early this yearthe informant says that he read in the Hong Kong papers that he has beensentenced to labor reform.

-5-Revolutionary Committees

In l967 both factions, imitating the January experience in Shanghai,had established so-called revolutionary committees.When the PLA repre-sentatives came, sometime from May to September that year, they had to dealwith this.They got the two faction leaders to participate in the MaoThought StudyClass(xuexi ban）.They participated in study all day, andforgotaboutproduction.At that time the PLA was the highest power holderin the factor--aa ‘Military Control Committee'（junguan hui).Remember theslogan, "san zhi liang jun" (三 支 两 $）， which means support the peasants,students, and workers, be an army for both struggle and production.

This Mao Thought study group was run for half a year, right up untilthey finally established the RC.AAlso the PLA representatives were in chargeof politicalsstudy during the period.Production did not improve during

The revolutionary committee was established in 1968 (he saysthis period.1969, but is certainly mistaken, since he thinks Shanghai's January Revolutionwassin 1968).1Right after its establishment, its membership included:the head of the military control committee, who was also the head of theRC;two vice-heads, each of whom was the leader of a faction in the plant;

Thisandthe rest of the members were the leaders of various factions.was not yet the "formal" (zhengshi） revolutionary committee, this camelater in 1969.There was an almost equal representation of the two factionson this version of the committee.

The departments were abolished and combined into a handful of groups

They had a 'production group', a 'political work group',aand a(zu).'logistics 9group'(houqin zu).

Each of these groups had leaders who weremembers of one or another faction.After a year, they decided that most ofthe cadres were revolutionary and should 'stand up'(zhanqilai).

At this time， a number of former cadres were sent back to leadingpositions, but not the sameleading positions as before.

If you were aplant vice-director before, you might be a shop director, if originallyyou wereashopdirector，you might now be a group leader orsection head.

When they carried out the 'formal' establishment of the revolutionarycommittee，tthey had a campaign called 'yi da san fan' （ 一 J 三 反 ),where they established study groups in each bureau, company, and municipality.Theysentfactionalleadersofarotatingbasis:tostudyinthesegroups.When these faction leaders left to 'study', the old cadres who had stoodup took their place 'temporarily', but it turned out to be permanent, becausethese faction leaders rarelyI came back to their original leading positions.Some were transfered to other factories, some returned but to non-leadershippositions, and some were found to have committed mistakes.These last wentto do labor reform.

Some actually did return to their leading positions,but these were in a minority.

After this the composition of the RC changed.The head was still thePLA deputy, but the vice-heads were now former plant-level leading cadres.The number of other leadingg cadres from before the CR increased, and the numberof former mass organization leaders on the Rc decreased.

By that time itdidn't matter how many representatives there were, they exercised no poweranyway.

Thiswas1970.

Shortly after this, at the end of l97l, before Lin Biao died, theyhad a movement called thee'anti May l6 elements'.

The purpose was to criti-cize, and removed from power or even send to labor reform the bad (huai)leaders from the cultural revolution factions.This means that they hadbeaten people, broken state laws, killed.9So as part of checking on theleadership qualifications at every level duringg this campaign, they investi-gated the past histories of these people.

"Not a few"((bushao) lost theirleading positions, and leading cadres from before the CR by then came to

-6-occupy the majority of positions. They also had l or 2 people on therevolutionary committee itself who were removed during this campaign.The PLA left in l973, and after that the head of the RC became theoriginal plant director/party secretary.

In l975, they finally restored the names of the departments, andthe original administrative structure was completely restored. Duringthe time he was working on the shop floor, they did have the '8 personnel'system, but they really didn't do anything(youming wu shi). Theyhad them only in name but not in reality.These people had titles butno work.  In 1978, after they restored the bonuses, they strengthened thissystem, because if they didn't do their jobs of checking attendance, quality,etc., then they couldn't carry out the new bonus system.

-7-

描述：

