id: ee655b7eb3
标题：Sentenced for Upholding the Law
日期：1978-0-0
是否是时间段：false
作者：最高人民法院
来源：西南政法学院刑法教研室, 冤假错案选编, 70-71
标签：文章
书籍：Sentenced for Upholding the Law
书籍作者：最高人民法院

正文：
# Sentenced for Upholding the Law

Rong Junwei, male, thirty-one years old, a member of Yacheng commune in Ya County, Guangdong. Because on 20 February 1975 [Rong] wrote and posted bigcharacter posters that publicly exposed and criticized land reform policies made by certain local commune party committee leaders, as well as [these leaders’] use of coercion and other illegal and unethical methods, he was sentenced on 15 September of the same year by the Ya County People’s Court to six years imprisonment. Rong refused to accept this ruling and appealed. The Hainan Li Nationality Autonomous Prefecture Middle-Level People’s Court then used “showed bad attitude when acknowledging guilt” as a reason to extend [Rong’s] sentence to eight years.

The cause and later development of this case were as follows: in spring of 1975, Yacheng Commune promulgated ten local regulations to “mobilize the entire party and strike back against the savage attack of capitalist forces.” To implement these ten communal regulations, the production teams then created local policies such as “twenty types of people that must participate in study sessions for feudal remnants, capitalists, and revisionist personnel.” It was announced that no one could hold private plots, attend county fairs, sell self-made products, or cut wood without seeking official approval. Individuals who came late to work or left early from work were indeed capitalists and need to be severely dealt with. Those who could not work due to illness, who always picked easy tasks over difficult ones, who were extremely picky about their work assignments, who argued over work points, who stayed after seven thirty in the morning in the fields to bicker with members of the small task group of the work team or local militia, and who disobeyed the leaders, were all classified as targets for [re-education] in the study sessions. Consequently, many commune members were paraded around the fields and streets with signs hanging from their necks. During these sessions, many grassroots-level cadres [and] poormiddle peasants were subjected to severe criticisms and struggles, or forced to pay fines and perform labor without compensation. Severe confusion caused people to be mistaken for enemies, and great damages were done to the local village economy. For these reasons, Rong Junwei held a group discussion with local commune broadcaster You Shiliang, elementary school instructor Wang Longwei, and veterinarian Lin Zhongying. Afterwards, with Rong as the key author, [the group] penned a bigcharacter poster with more than 10,000 words entitled “A record of real events that took place in Yacheng Commune from January to February 1975,” which publicly exposed, named, and criticized two commune party secretaries for creating a capitalist dictatorship, carrying out rent exploitation, exercising autocracy, and acting as fascists. [The poster] also called for their resignation.

After the big-character poster was posted, the [public] response was great. Many people gathered to read it while expressing praises and support. But there were also some people that said it was “reactionary.” The commune wanted to track down the author of the poster. On 22 February, Rong, wearing a vest with the words “The truth lies in my breast, and the pen is in my hand; freedom is having neither private motives nor fear,” went to the office director of Yacheng Police Station and said: “The bigcharacter poster was written by me. Is it really reactionary? Please make your standpoint clear.” When he realized that the county party committee had confirmed that the big-character poster was indeed reactionary, Rong posted [another] “flyer” on 27 February, and made speeches on the streets in the evening, calling out invitations for the masses to join him. That night, the commune [authorities] rounded Rong up and struggled against him on the grounds that he had committed a counterrevolutionary crime, [and] then locked him up. Afterwards, extracts of the bigcharacter posters were circulated as “Five big reactionary standpoints,” and they were reprinted for all the production teams. Rong was paraded around for criticisms and struggles, and a study session was established for other individuals connected to [writing the poster], as well as those that showed support [for the poster contents]. Finally, Rong was arrested and sentenced for having committed active counterrevolutionary crimes.

At the end of 1975, Guangdong High People’s Court’s Case Review Group came to Yacheng to investigate and discovered that this case belonged to the category of “wrong cases.” They suggested to the middle-level court that a request be made to the party committee for Rong’s release and his rehabilitation, and they also submitted a written report to members of the provincial Party committee’s political legal committee. The provincial Party committee’s political legal committee sent a written request for the Hainan Prefecture Party Political Law committee to investigate the case. In June 1976, the Hainan Prefecture Party Political Law committee set up a work team to carry out a re-investigation. The conclusion was: the big-character poster’s contents were in alignment with the actual circumstances; this case was wrongly handled and should be corrected. Yet because some individuals’ thinking was still unreasonable, no resolution was made. After public criticisms from leading comrades in the provincial Party committee, the provincial court made another ruling with added commentary. Finally, in December 1977, Ya County People’s Court reversed their previous judgment, declared Rong to be innocent, and released him.

Selected from the Supreme People’s Court’s Judicial Work Bulletin, Volume 20 (1978).

Translated by Menghan Yan

描述：

