id: 2049003bd7
标题：Hong Kong Interviews: Informant No. 30
日期：1980-4-11
是否是时间段：false
作者：Andrew G. Walder
来源：
标签：文章
书籍：Hong Kong Interviews: Informant No. 30
书籍作者：Andrew G. Walder

正文：
INFORMANT NO.30PERSONAL DATA

Sex:MaleAge:27

upper middle school graduateEducation:

6Total Years Relevant Experience:

Year Left China:  1978Last Year of Relevant Experience: l978Initial Immigration Status:Legal

Fujian native/os ties unknownNative Place/Overseas Connections:

unknownClass Background/Political Designation:

OCCUPATIONAL HISTORY SUMMARYPositions Held:1) Shop and office worker, Chemical Products Plant,

Xiamen, 1973-78Administrative Level of Work Unit/(No. of employees);

1) Municipal, collective/(250)

TOTAL HOURS: 2.5

PAGES TEXT: 3APPOINTMENTS :√No. 30Occupational History(4/11/80, 2.5 hrs.)

The informant worked in a collective chemical factory in Xiamen from1973-78. The factory had about 220 employees, and was run by the lightindustry bureau of the city government.  The plant produced candles andfacial cream for export.He had been sent down toa village after gradua-ting from middle school, but could apply to get back early because he wasthe only child in his family.AAfter he returned, he was assigned to thiscollective enterprise by the city labor bureau. He worked in this factoryuntil he came to Hong Kong, legally, in l978. He worked as a staff memberin various offices while he was there.Wages

He was an apprentice when he first started, at l8 per month. Therewere a number of supplements also which increased his real income. Duringthe second year, he got 2l¥, then 24¥ the third. So he was an apprentice,even while he was working in the offices. After 3 years he was maderegular (zhuanzheng). He was a grade l worker at 38¥. He was not givena raise thereafter. With all the other supplements it came to somewhat more.There was a readjustment in l977. They set up year lines for length ofservice, and also assessed others on top of this according to their work,in smallI group discussions.Bonuses

When he first started work there was no bonus system.They werejust started in l978, the year he left, so he's not too clear aboutthem.TemporaryWorkers

If they didn't have enough workers to meet their production demands,they could go to local communes or to street committees.They signed acontract with the communes for a certain period of time which specifiedcompensation.Shorter term people came from the streets, often studentson vacation.They don't always sign contracts, and can just work for l-2weeks. The work they did was of two types--packaging the products, lightwork; or things like moving and transport work. Packaging was piece work.Other workers who have worked for a long time might get l.2¥ per day.Punishments, Firings

If a worker's work is very bad, they can have a meeting and decide toexpel him.But this is rare.This had to be decided by the party secretary.If someone is fired, it is very hard to get work again as a regular worker,because this goes into your file. Then they go into temporary labor, orgo to the village.

The first step is to criticize a worker in production meetings.1Youcan do this by anonymous criticism, or if problems are more serious, you canname the person in the criticism.You can be criticized at different levelsof meetings--in small group, shop,all-plant. This can be anonymous criticism,or can name names.This is just for poor work habits or behavior. If yousteal things, or commit crimes, the work unit can turn your case over to thepolice for investigation and punishment.

There were no workers fired in his factory, for any reason, while hewas there. There was one middle-level cadre who was caught in corruption,and he was sent to another plant to be a worker.

-1-Elections

The shop directors were selected according to masses' opinions assounded out at meetings, but actually they were appointed by above becausesomeone from above came to lead the mass meeting.

Requirements were strict,and the person had to be a youth league or party member at least, havegood work, and there were not many around who had these cqualifications.

They had electionsfor group）leaders irregularly, according to faceto face group meetings, and would agree on a person.But unless one's workwas very bad, they would usually reelect the group leader again, or just lethim continue until he transfers or does a bad job.They could haveelections for this because the group director was not all that important,was not a 'big official' (da guan).There were no changes in this electionpolicy up until the time he left in l978.Work Experience in Offices

Before he came to the plant there were 2 women tohandle the stores,canku yuan.But early in his time in the plant, these 2 were sent to theshops as part of 'simplifying structures', and were sent to labor.1Hewas an apprentice worker at that time, and was promoted to handle theplant stores, the raw materials warehouse. The chief materials were wax,oils, vaseline, alcohol. ?They had one other warehouse, this was forfinished products.Thewarehousewasdividedintomaterialsandoilssections.

When workers came to get materials, they brought a 'requisition form'(lingliao dan), which he had to sign.

When they were short of one or twoitems, he would notify the purchasing agentss(caigou yuan)， who would tryto get the items.After they got them, they would till out another form whenmaterialsweretakenintothestores(jincang dan).They gave reports tothe plant office 2 times a month.This was an inventory ot stocks of eachtype, and a report of input and output figures on each type of articlefor the entire month.

They would turn these over to accountants in theadministrative office of the plant.  He was the only person working inthis warehouse.

After two years, the administrative structure was being reshuffled,sohee was transfered to the general affairs office (zongwu), to take theplace of a restingworker whose health was not good.Another young workertookhisownplaceinthewarehouse.In general affairs, he had to managethe canteen, he handled work uniforms, labor and welfare, arrangements forsickness or deaths in workers' families, and gave out supplements to thosein economic difficulties.

He also managed the physical plant--buildings,

He would check things outroofs， etc., but not the production equipment.and notify other departments to makee repairs.

So his duties were broad.He also cooperated with hygeine (campaigns,and helped turn people out for official parades and celebrations.Heworkedout of an administrative office with accountants, a cashier, and a coupleof procuring agents.The warehousemen are also under this office's direction.This office was under the leadership of the plant director.So in all therewere 5 people in his office.Plant Leadership

The revolutionary committee was headed by the party secretary, whilethe vice-head was the plant director.

There were also other members.The members were representatives from each of the departments, includingthe security department, administrative department, and labor and wages

But these people were not always the leading cadres.

Somedepartment.wereworkers. But all had to be party members, and masses opinions had to

-2-be favorable toward them.  There were 6 members altogether.  About 2 wereoriginally workers, one of who had recently been promoted to be shopdirector, and another who was recently promoted to be a procuring agent.

They had a workers' congress, but this was nothing special. It wasa meeting led by the party to open a movement, and consisted of activistmodel workers. They were all advanced workers.

They had a system of rotating manual labor for the staff, but nothingspecial. Each was supposed to do manual labor l-2 times each week if theiradministrafive responsibilities were completed. This was not a rigidlyadhered toresponsibility.

They had shop directors, below which were group leaders, and alsoworkers who were appointed materials 'yuan', safetymen, and attendancecheckers.

At the top of the plant was the party branch, led by the partybranch secretary, below which were several departments, and 2 partysmall groups, each with its own leader.

一3一

描述：

