id: 27996074cc
标题：Hong Kong Interviews: Informant No. 67
日期：1980-8-2,1980-8-3
是否是时间段：false
作者：Andrew G. Walder
来源：
标签：文章
书籍：Hong Kong Interviews: Informant No. 67
书籍作者：Andrew G. Walder

正文：
INFORMANT NO. 67

PERSONAL DATAAge:41

Sex:MaleEducation:Middle school graduateTotal Years Relevant Experience:

23Last Year of Relevant Experience: 1980

Year Left China:1980Initial Immigration Status:LegalNative Place/Overseas Connections:

Guangdong native/wife in Hong KongClass Background/Political Designation: unknown

OCCUPATIONALHISTORYSUMMARYPositions Held: l) Staff, Central Laboratory, Chemical Fertilizer Factory,

Guangdong, 1958-662) Petrochemical Plant, Canton, 1966-73

a) Staff, Production Control Department, l966-68

b) Lab Assistant, Laboratory, 1968-733) Chief Technician, Medicine-making plant, small town

in Guangdong, 1973-80Administrative Level of Work Unit/(No. of employees):

1) Province/(2000)2）Province/(l000)

3) county or town/(l00)Experience in Full-time Manual Labor (for non-worker occupations):

unknown

TOTAL HOURS: 4.5

PAGES TEXT:APPOINTMENTS:  2

SNo. 67Occupational History(8/2/80, 2.5 hrs.)

The informant graduated from middle school in the mid-l950s, andworked for a while in an export-import company in Canton.  In l958 he wasassigned to a newly-built chemical fertilizer factory of about 2000employees as a technician.'The plant was under provincial bureau adminis-tration.He worked in the central laboratory of the plant on experimentswith new products.They were responsible for quality analysis and controlfor finished products, as well as experimentation with new products.Healso did some procurement and designing work in the first couple of yearswhen they were still finishing plant construction and hadn't yet startedproduction.  He worked here until l966.

In 1966 he was transfered to a petrochemical plant in Canton whichproduced methane and chemicals for fibres, about looo employees, alsounder the provincial bureau.

Heworkedintheproductioncontroloffice(shengchan diaodu ke), which was separate from the production and technicaldepartments, but had close relations with both.It was directly underthe plant director.1He worked here about 2 years and then was transferedback tothe laboratory of the factory as labtechnician.

He did thisuntil l973, when he was transfered to a medicine factory.

In l973 he was sent back to his home town (another city in Guangdong)where he was assigned to a small (lo0 person) medicine-making factcryunder the municipal government.1He was the head technician in the plant.He worked here until he came to Hong Kong legally in early l980.His wifeis a Hongg Kong native who moved toChina in the l950s.She came out in1979, and he followed shortly thereafter.Wages

When he first started working, he got 40+¥. He was given a raiseone grade in 1963,and also in 197l,and no more after that.When he lefthis wages were at 58.5￥.He also got supplements.There was a wage reformin 1956, a sma11 readjustment in 1959 and 1963, a big one in 1971, and bigones in 1977 and 1979-80.1In 1959 and 1963, the most important criteria

In 1959 only cadres got raised,was that the leadership nominated you.in 1963 both cadres and workers.They did not have any group assessments,this was only1 after the cultural revolution.The leadership decided.

In 1971,the raises were given out according to years of experienceand accordinggtowhetherornot youhadlowwages.Again, no assessments.Strictly according to years of service.

In 1977, theyhad raises for 40% of both workers and cadres.A partof them were done according to years of service--about 20%. Then another40% were assessed in smalll group meetings according to work performance.The process took about 2-3 months to complete in any given group, since theymet for one hour after work about twice a week.?Then the names are siftedthrough again at shop meetings with group leaders in attendance, then again atall-plant level with shop leaders attending.

In 1979, again 40%, and again they assessed in smalll groups the sameway as in 1977.This was supposed to be entirely according to work contribu-tion and skill.  Some contradictions appeared in the midst of this.Every-one wanted to raise their standard of living since most people'ss were stillfairly low.Also, the opportunities to do so were rare, and some hadn'thad raises for l0-l5 years. Also, it was very difficulttocompareper-formances on different kinds of jobs.SSo people argued and disagreed.1Finallythe problem was solved by having the leadership make the final decision andreleasingg the names.

-1-Bonuses

They had bonuses before 1966 and after 1977.The system was differentin different kinds of factories..And there were differences within factories.There was the general (zonghe) bonus, then there were several individualbonuses--overfulfilling quotas, quality. 1In some factories, piece rateswere used, but this was more common in collective factories.

Most workers were assessed for bonuses every month.Most cadres wereassessed every quarter. Then there was a year-end bonus that depended onhow often you were chosen for the topbonus in monthly or quarterly7assess-ments during the year.They assessed in small1 group meetings, and the methodwas about the same as they used for raises in the last two readjustments.In some factoriess the shop or group would be able to give out more bonusesdepending on output or profit, but this was not always the case. In hisplant they gave each an amount of money equal to 8% of the wage bill todistributeasbonuses.This came out of welfare money givenI by the state.

The monthly bonuses were divided into 3 grades,8¥，7¥，and16￥.About70% of the workers got bonuses.The quarterly bonus ranged from 50, 40, 30¥.In each case, most workers who got bonuses got the middle grade, whilegrades l and 3 were smaller.

The individual bonuses, which were mostly for workers (but they alsohadqualitybonusesfor technicians）usually amountedto2-3¥ figuredona monthly basis.The bonus for overfulfilling quotas are set at the grouplevel. You can't set individual bonuses in a chemical plant. If thegroup overfulfills its quotas, it gets a chao'e jiang (or bonus fui' overful-filling quota). Plant-level leaders got no bonuses.Shop directors anddepartment heads got bonuses the same as everyone else.

In the cultural revolution they abolished this kind of bonus system.In the cultural revolution and until l977, they had supplementary wages.

Allcadres got 4.5 ¥，all workers 5¥.They did not assess after that.Workers who started after l967 did not get supplementary wages.Thesesupplementary wages are maintained right uptothe present if the workersgetting them were not given raises in l979.If in the l979-80 readjustmentsthey get a raise, then the supplementary wages are cancelled.This was notthe case in 1977-78.

During this period when they had no bonuses they had assessments foradvanced workers once a year, andd they would continue to assess up to the cityand national level. In his unit about 5% were selected, and given tokenprizes like towels and notebooks.No money.

When they began to restore the bonus system in l978, the general bonuswas smaller in amount than before the cultural revolution, but more workerswere eligible (remember, he's in a different work unit now).?They also had

(danxiang) bonuses--for full attendance((which theythe same individualdid not have in the chemical fertilizer plant before), and overfulfillingquotas.Also item bonuses for scientific inventions and technicalinnovations.

They use the same method of small group assessment as before the CR.His factory used a loo point system, while there were other factories

In their plant, if you were absenttoothat also use the 3-grade system.many times, or caused an accident, no bonus.Otherwise they assessed1youaccording to a point system, and the value of the points varied only

The amountaccording to the total number of points given out inithe group.available for bonuses was fixed according to the total wage bill.TThen aftereveryone was assessed, the total number of points given out was divided intothis fixed amount of money to get the worth of each point.Then you addedthem up to derive the bonus.

-2-

They did not rely much on group assessment discussions after the CR.Most of the points were deducted according to work records--especiallyattendance and work output. If someone did something wrongtheywouldhavea grouppdiscussionanddecidetodeduct acertain number of pointsthatmonth. If someone fell below the 70 point mark, no bonus, and if someonedidn't do anything wrong, they kept all 100 points.The highest was usuallyaround‘6¥, the lowest 4¥. But the situation, he stresses, is different ineach factory.

Some will give you a few mao if you have earned only a fewpoints.Other factories have piece rate systems and it is possible to get100¥ a month.Worker Motivation

This new system has had some effect of worker activism.But it alsohas its problems.'There are problems with a bonus Ssystem，just astherewere problems with a no-bonus system.

With no bonuses it doesn't matterwhether workers work hard or not, they still get paid the same.Thereisno competition to spur on workers.But the problem with having bonuses isfinding a way to assess people properly, because it is very possible formany contradictions to arise between workers.SSoeachfactorytries tofind an appropriate way to assess workers.  Since implementingthe bonussystem, worker activism has been improved. This is especiallythe casein piece rate systems where you can earn a great deal of money.1Als0,the attendance ratess(chuqin lu) have risen a great deal.1Workers now willnot ask for sick leave for minor discomforts or illnesses.Temporary andContract Workers

(8/3/80, 2 hrs.)

They had temporary workers who came from several sources, both fromagricultural villages and from the people without jobs in the city.There

Thefirstisthat theyhave afixedaretwoconditionsforemployment.

When the work is finished, so is employment.jobto do，1like construction.The second is when the number of workers in the plan is not enough tomeet new targets, they get permission from the labor bureau to hire temporaryworkers, and these are more long-term.Iff their work and behavior is good,then they can be turned into formal workers after a while.

They also have contract workers who sign contracts for one, two, orthree months.They come from both the cities and the countryside.Theonesin the city are registered at labor bureaus like city temporary workers, andget fixed contracts because the nature or length of the job may be different.From the communes they comein groups, and the contract is signed betweenthefactory andcommune for anentire group）ofworkers.This is oftenduring the slack agricultural season.

The city temporary and contract workers are registered at labor bureaus

Whenand they have files there specifying.their skills and experience.

Thethe factory notifies them they ask for certain types of workers.countryside workers are arranged directly between the factories and communes.The labor bureau approves andlaarranges introductions, while the enterprisehandles concrete negotiations and arrangements.

As far as temporary and contract workers from the countryside go,there are two wage conditions. Most give a portion of wages back to thecommune in exchange for work points and grain.SSome do not do this， anddo not get grain.Some workers from the communes are able to get permissionto move into the city(to have their hukou1 transfered)if the labor bureaupermits it.This is usually in small or medium sized cities when laborsupply is tight.The biggest example ofthis was the Great Leap Forward.

Workers fromthe city also have two ways of finding these temporaryjobs.They can register either at the labor bureau or at their local

-3-residents' committee office. TThe latter are usually dependents in households.

The workers from the cities have wage grades assigned to them on thebasis of their experience and tests for skill.Their grade is on theirlabor bureau file.

They are paid varying amounts accordingtowhethertheydomanuallabor orcancoperate a lathe, drill press, or can do a fitter'swork.Those from the countryside usually do onlyy manual labor.1Usuallythe wages are equal to a grade one worker.

Theyalways had these kinds of workers, but the amount varied. Afterthee CR they had more, because production was not coordinated very well, anddemand for labor fluctuated, so the number of these kinds of workers increased.Before the CR production was more carefully balanced and planned, so theyneeded fewer.1Now that they are reorganizing the economy, they should beemployingfewer ofthesekindsof workersonce again.Central Laboratory in the Chemical Fertilizer Plant, l958-66

The main task of the laboratory was to inspect the qualityy of production.But the shops also had their own labs, and they were responsible also forquality inspections there.

The shop labs were fairly simple.The laboratoryhad engineers, technicians, and some technical workers.When they foundsomethingwrong withqualitytthey would report to the production controldepartment and the shop0 director involved.

Theytooksamplesofchemicalsfor analysis before they put them in the stores, and their personnel alsodid occassional inspections in the shops.Most of their quaiity irspectionstook place in the lab, not in the shops.

The shop laboratories were under the shop director, not the centrallaboratory.  TThey received advice from the central labor but not leadership.They were very polite to the central lab, however.The shop labs didproduction control. 'They had three shifts,had to do chemical analysis ofhalf-finished products and finished products both at fixed intervals, and make

The central lab, however,technical adjustments in the production process.simply did analysis on final products before they would be offeredfor saletooutside units.The central lab was under the plant headquarters.

The head of the lab was an administrative party cadre who had a university

He was assisted by twoeducation, but did not studyanything technical.engineers.Thelabheadwastthere for administrative purposes, was an'outsider'(waihang).The engineers were only advisors, he did not have tolisten to their advice.

Their leading group was made up of the plant director, several vice-

They were undertheleadershipdirectors who divided up responsibility.of the party committee, but the plant director was responsible completelyfor production matters.The plant director was like most others, anadministrative party cadre who had been in the PLA before liberation, around60 years old.Most of the vice-directors were the same.‘There were veryfew who received specialized university training in their fields.

Most of the vice-directors, and also the plant director, were members

The party secretary wasof the party committee's standing committee.supposed to handle only general matters, ideological issues, campaigns, andbig issues in the plant.But since the Great Leap Forward you can saythat in reality he was the first in command in the plant.

Their plant had just started production in the Great Leap Forward,soit is hard to say whatchanges there were.Theysent a lot of techniciansfrom the departments down to the shops, and they worked as technicians in

This was called'strengtheningg the shops','simplifyingthe shops for a while.administration'.They soon returned to the departments after a while, whilesome were transfered to other factories.Production increased, and the numberof workers grew quickly, but this was also due to the fact that this was anew plant,aand this was planned anyway, so it is hard to say what was dueto the Great Leap and what was not.

-4-Production ControlOffice in the Petrochemical Plant

He was transfered in l966 to another new plant where he worked in theproduction control office, which was separate from the production department

The production control office was responsible for assuringin his plant.balanceofproduction.

They had to keep in touch with the situation ineach shop several times during the day, know when there were breakdowns,quality problems, materials shortages or imbalances developing.Thentheywould have to dispatch people to remedy the situation, or transfer equip-ment, personnel, materials.

They had around l0 people in the office, spread out over three shifts.Most were technicians.The leading cadre was a technician among them.They read daily reports, stayed on the telephone, made personal inspectionvisits to the shops.The most common problem they ran into was a break-down in machinery.In these cases they would dispatch a number of workersfrom theerepair shoptofix the problem.

They had the power to do this.The shop director could not do this because the shops are parallel withonee another. A second thing is not the equipment but the production process.They have to make sure that the pressure andtemperature in the machinery iscorrect in all the shops, and that the quality at each step is correct.

Toassure this they have theeshop technicians check the gauges and reporton them and have the labs report on quality.iIf there is a problem, theyorder the shop director to have his technicians correct the situation.Ifthe problem cannot be solved quickly, they report to the chief engineer or theplant director.They do not want these kinds of quality or productionproblems to persist in a shop because it will influence the next shop'sproduction by depriving it ofmaterials and will upset the balance ofproduction.(Other than this，tthe most common problem was the supply ofmaterials, of electric power and gas.Onoccasionthesewouldbeinsuffi-cient or cut off, and there was not much they could do about it.It wasnot common, but it happened.

During the CR, things were in disorder.Around 1969 they establisheda revolutionary committee.This was after the province established theirs.The first head of the RC was a cadre transfered in from another plant.There were alsoseveralcadres fromthe PLA involved.But we don't needto talk about this because this involves the Cultural Revolution and besides

No,they have abolished revolutionary committees, and don't use them now.they never simplified administration and never abolished departments.

Thesewere slogans in the paper, but in fact the number of people was too much for

Theyhave since restoredthosethe work to do, and work efficiency went down.systems which were advantageous for production.Medicines Factory, 1973-80

This was a small factory, they didn't have any departments.They justhad a leading group which handled a whole range of different tasks.Hewas the technician in charge, and handled all major repairs,designing work,quality inspection, development of new products, experiments that needed to

They had several shops, also a laboratory which he was in charge of.bedone.

The plant madeThe head of their plant was an old cadre, an administrator.western style medicines.

In the past several years there were some changes in the plant.They

They strengthened managementhad new leaders transfered in from outside.

Theyiintroduced some automation insystems, especially quality inspection.

They had not had any elections, nor were they pre-the production process.paring for them when he left, although he has heard of them in other plants.At the time they abolished the RC in l978 or so, they took the head of the RCand made him into a plant director, just changed his title. In a small plantlike this he was at the same time party secretary.

-5-

描述：

