id: 235c3fbf7a
标题：Hong Kong Interviews: Informant No. 61
日期：1980-6-30
是否是时间段：false
作者：Andrew G. Walder
来源：
标签：文章
书籍：Hong Kong Interviews: Informant No. 61
书籍作者：Andrew G. Walder

正文：
INFORMANT NO. 61

PERSONAL DATAAge:47

Sex:Male

Medical CollegeEducation:

18Total Years Relevant Experience:Last Year of Relevant Experience: l978

Year Left China:.1978

LegalInitial Immigration Status:Native Place/Overseas Connections:

Vietnam 0S, returned 1950s

OSClass Background/Political Designation:

OCCUPATIONALHISTORYSUMMARYPositions Held:. l) Doctor, County hospital attached to local factories,

near Hangzhou (wife a factory clinic doctor during

same period), 1961-78Administrative Level of Work Unit/(No. of employees);

1） County

TOTAL HOURS: 2

PAGES TEXT:APPOINTMENTS:1

3No. 61Occupational History(6/30/80, 2 hrs.)

The informant is an overseas Chinese, a native of Hue, Vietnam, whoreturned to China during the l950s to study.He was a doctor， and workedin a county-run hospital near Hangzhou in Zhejiang. He worked there from1961-78.Part of his responsibility was to see

workers from nearbyfactories, and sign sick leave certificates.His wife was also a doctorand she worked in a factory clinic during thee same period in the samearea.Her plant had about 3000 workers.The interview draws both onthe informant's own experience and in places on that of his wife.Doctors and Sick Leave

If a worker feels sick and wants to see a doctor, he can do one ofseveral things.First，he canto to the factory clinic before the shift

Second, he can ask to go'in the middle of the shift, in whichstarts.case he asks permission from the group leader.Third, he can go afterthe shift--normally 3-4pm is the busiest time in factory clinics.sSomejust stay at home and rest, and whenever they get up they go see the doctorto get the certificate.Thereisnosetsystemforaskingforleave.Chinese factories are pretty lax (suibian) about these kinds of things.There is no time clock to punch.

If a worker wantstosee a doctor aiter44pm when the factory clinic isclosed, he has to see a person on duty who will (give a certificate to himallowing him to be seen at a hospital.

This iss the case for acute diseases.For normal chronic problems, they will tell the person to come back tothe clinic the next day.For serious problemss the clinic doctor can issuea certificate allowing the worker to go to the hospital..So if a workerwants to go to the hospital he has to have forms filled out first at thefactory clinic.

Generally speaking, the clinic doctors have power to sign sick leaveforms for one week or less.

The hospital doctors have the power to signforms completely according to the illness.?There is no limit on them.But all the forms signed by the hospital doctor need to be countersignedby the doctor in the factory clinic.If the leave authorized is for 3 days

For 3 days to one week,orless, the shopodirector does not need to sign.

In the hospital, a regular doctor couldthe shopdirector has to sign.sign for one day, a department head for 3 days, and the hospital directorfor over a week.

Workers got full.pay for sick leave up to 6 months in a row, while the7th month they got.only 40% of their wage.But they had ways to get aroundthis by asking for 5 months leave, then working half time (also with doctor'scertificate) for a month, then ask for long-term sick leave again.

Thishappened a lot.

There were fewer workers asking for

Trends in sick leave requests:sick leave during the period before l966,and after 1977.

During the inter-vening l0 years workers asked for sick leave more often, often feigningillness or arguing with doctors over the number of days sick leave they

If they argued, doctors usually just signed the form forwere given.them because the workers could acuse them of being a stinking intellectualwho doesn't serve the workers, peasants, aand army.

When there are argu-ments of this sort, the leading cadre would never support the doctorsbut the workers.So when the workers argued, the doctors just gave inand signed.  IDuring these lo years workers would generally ask for moreleave than initially given.

But before and after this period they hesitated

-1-to take more than 2 days, even if offered, because after 3 days sick leavein a month they would no longer be eligible for a bonus.

Peoplee would also use personal relations with doctors to ask for moreleave, and sometimes would use connections.For example, sometimestheplant director would ask for a month's sick leave for his wife， and youdidn'tdarenotagreetoit.If your disability is due to industrialinjury, they often do not deduct wages after 6 months.Also, the informalpractice is to allow children or wives to take the place of the injuredworker if permanently disablee or killed.  But thissis all informallyarranged, there are no set regulations.

People would use personal guanxi to get a few days of sick leavewithout really being ill.Good friends of doctors can obtain sick leavecertificates for their other friends without these third parties everhaving to come in and see the doctor.But you have to have pretty goodrelations with a doctor to manage this.SSometimes these transactions areaccompanied by gifts to.doctors, but these are not directly connectedwith any particular favor or request as such.What these gifts aredepends on the person's own resources.If you havee a relative in thecountry, you cangive the doctor eggs or vegetables.:If you are a skilledworker, you offer to do work--painting, repairing, carpentry--in his home.But these favors are usually only accepted from people who know a doctorfairly well.

So every worker as a result wants to befriend a doctor.Everyone is nice to.the doctor.This was a common practice, but wasespe-cially prevalent in the period after the cultural revolution, partlybecause people wanted to avoid a political campaign in which they werenot interested.

In the same way, tthere were many leading cadres who pretended illnessduring the cultural revolution, because they wanted to escape criticismby mass factions.Also, if workers wanted to get out of work for exchangeof experiences, or armed struggle in the cultural revolution, they sometimesasked for sick leave for this.

In the period after the cultural revolution right upoto 1977， fakingillness was a serious problem.

Doctorssigmedevenwhenn they suspectedfakers because often it is hard to tell, and they didn't want:toarguewiththem.The leaders also knew this was a serious problem, but theyhad no way to solve it, and also they didn't want to offend the workers,becauseethey knewanother political movement might come and theycould beattacked and beaten by workers as during the cultural revolution.SSotheywere a little scared to crack down.

After l977, the problem did improve because if you had over 3 days of

Workers even asked for fewer days.]Butsick leave in a month,no bonus.if they had already surpassed the 3 days in a given month, for the rest of

If they were lucky;the month they would abuse sick leave, feign illness.they would have genuine illnesses early in the month, then be able to takeadvantage for almost the entire month thereafter.

When the next monthbegan, they would stop.

But conditions are not theesameinall plants.Different enterpriseshave different bonus systems, and they are continually evolving.So thoseplants that have (quarterly and year-end bonuses that take over-all attendanceinto account are able to prevent workers from abusing sick leave duringthese 'lost' months.(Generally speaking, the problem of attendance hasimproved a 1ot over the period from 1966 to 1976.

-2-Production Campaigns and Industrial Accidents

After l970, they ran several production campaigns, because during thisperiod they started to grasp production.  During these campaigns thenumber of industrial accidents increased.  Also, there were generally moreindustrial accidents in collective enterprises, like the collective ironsmelting plant in their county. because they were responsible for theirowm profits and losses and they single-mindedly pushed for more production.Generally the labor protection equipment is not as good as in state-runenterprises. Workers from these collective enterprises rarely come tothe hospital to ask for sick leave, because if. they don't work, theydon'tgetpaid.

一3一

描述：

