id: c4865d8717
标题：Hong Kong Interviews: Informant No. 6
日期：1979-12-12,1979-12-19,1979-12-27,1980-1-2,1980-1-12,1980-1-23
是否是时间段：false
作者：Andrew G. Walder
来源：
标签：文章
书籍：Hong Kong Interviews: Informant No. 6
书籍作者：Andrew G. Walder

正文：
INFORMANTNO.6

PERSONALDATAAge:39

Sex:Male

College graduate (industrial chemistry)Education:Total Years Relevant Experience::15Last Year of Relevant Experience: l978

Year Left China: 1978Initial Immigration Status: LegalNative Place/overseas Connections:

Guangdongnative/osconnectionsunknownClass Background/Political Designation: unknown

OCCUPATIONALHISTORYSUMMARYPositions Held: 1) Chemical Fertilizer Factory, near Canton, l964-68

a) Lab technician, Lab head, 1964-68

b） Acting plant director, 1968

2) Laboratory head, Aluminum Factory, Guangdong, 1969-78Administrative Level of Work Unit/(No. of employees)

1) Province

2) ProvinceExperience in Full-time Manual Labor (for non-worker occupations):

labor tempering after graduation, four months, 1964;culturalrevolutionexperience unknown

TOTAL HOURS:13APPOINTMENTS:

6

PAGES TEXT:

9No. 6Occupational History:

(12/12/79，2 hrs.)

The informant is from Chaozhou, Guangdong province.  He enteredGuangdong Normal University in l96o, and studied in the Chemistry Department.Hisspecialtyy was the chemical analysis of industrial materials.In1964,he graduated, and was assigned to a Chemical Fertilizer Factory on theoutskirts of Canton.

The factory was under provincial administration.He was a practicing technician for one year, then made a full-fledgedtechnician.He was assigned to Laboratory work after a short period ofmanual labor to familiarize himself with the plant and the productionprocess.  After one year, in l965, he was promoted to be the head of thelaboratory. In 1968, in the midst of the Cultural Revolution, he waspromoted to the position of plant director after the original directorstood aside. He was the 'expert' plant director and handled production;there was also a party member who was the director in charge of politics.In l969 he was transferred to a new Aluminum Plant in Guangdong.

Herehe worked in the laboratory also, aid experimental work and was head ofthe lab.In the beginning, he was responsible for setting up the lab,and duringg this period he traveled around to buy equipment for the lab.After this period, he settled in as lab director.

He worked as labdirector up until he left China to come to Hong Kong, legally, in February1978.Chemical Fertilizer Plant Experience, l964-l969）(12/19/79, 2 hrs.)

The plant had about 5o0 workers and 50 cadres.It had the thirdlargest output of chemical fertilizer in Guangdong province.There was oneplant director, who handled all aspects of production, and one vice-director,who handled technical matters only.

Below the directors were the variousdepartmentss and the laboratory.

They had a technical department, a financedepartment, sales and supply department, general affairs department (thishandled livelihood matters and the dorms and canteen).Each of thedepartments were divided into 'sections' (gu), which handle more specializedmatters within the sphere of the department's responsibilities.Therewere four shops:phosphate fertilizer, sulphuric acid, aluminum sulfate,and machine repair shop.  Each shop had about loo workers.  Each shop wasdivided into sections of about 20-30 workers each,and each section wasdivided into groups of about 4-6 workers each.

Personnel:

They had no engineers in the plant.?They had threelaboratory technicians, and several laboratory assistants (l2) who werenormally technical middle school graduates.[University trained teahnicianscannot get a raise in pay without a central document ordering it.A firstyear practicing technician (jianxi) gets 46, while a second year technician,after being 'made regular' (zhuanzheng), gets 56¥. All the technicians inthe plant got about the same wages, because they all had graduated between1962-65.1Middle-school trained technicians were assistant technicians(zhuli jishuyuan) after graduation.

Those who had studied at professionaltraining collegas6(zhuanke xuexiao), would be full-fledgee technicians,not assistants, but would make about 4¥ less at each pay grade.SSo therewere three educational grades for technicians.Those who attended a fullfour year course in a university or an industrial college would be technicians.Those who attended professional training colleges, a 2-3 year course, wouldalso be technicians, but get less pay.TThosewhoattendedmiddleschoolsor special middle schools for prefessional training (zhongdeng zhuanke xuexiao)would be assistant technicians.

-1-

Workers worked on an 8-grade scale， grade l being 36￥, with 6￥increments at each step.1Most of the workers in the plant were grade lor 2 workers, with the majority being gradee 2.In the shops, they hadworkers who were called 'lab workers'.

They controlled the production inshopss underthedirection of the shop director，and if there was any difficultmatter， they would consult the lab office.These workers learned theirskills at another plant during a several month period, and afterwards became

The difference between 'skilled' and 'regular' workersskilled workers.is as follows: The technical workers (jishu gong)）had to go through athree-year apprentice training period beforethey were made full-fledgedworkers (zhuanzheng).These are workers who are usually young (l8-2l) whenthey start out, and their educational level is relatively high.They mostlyhave graduated from lower middle school or above.Theymake20-22¥ duringtheir first year, 24-26¥ during their second, and 28-30¥ during theirthird and final year. Grade one workersgetabout34¥，whereunskilledworkersget only 32￥ or so.9Skilledworkers get about 2¥ moreat thesamegradelevel than unskilled workers, but this depends on the region and the typeof skilled work you do. These skilled workers are promoted more quicklythan regular workers, are the 'backbone' of the factory's work, and playan important role. Unskilled workers are called "shulian gong", which infact means 'skilled worker'.So the real distinction here is between'technical workers'and 'skilled workers'.The 'skilled' workers beginwork at any age, there is no apprenticeship, and they go directly to levelone.There are no restrictionssabout educational level.!They are promoted

They are less important for production.They do more difficultmore slowly.manual labor and are in the majority of the labor force.:Since differencesbetween each1 grade on the 83 grade scale is about 6¥, the differences between'skilled and technical workers cannot be more than about 2¥, since any morewould put you too close to a higher grade.So to repeat, the more skilledworkers are called 'technical workers"(jishu gong), while the less skilledordinary workers are called 'skilled workers' (shulian gong). (Correct?)

Personal Job Experience:

The Laboratory Director was responsiblefor planning and dispatching (diaodu), to direct the work of the lab technicians,to draw up work procedures and make work assignments.Above him was theassistant plant director iesponsible for technical matters.:In 1968, he.was raised to plant director, because the situation changed in the plant duringthe CR.The past directors was attacked for bureaueratism, attitude problems.The informant was elected director at a mass meeting, but wasn't really wiliingto be director.

Butwith1theencouragement of the machinerepair shopdirector,he was convinced.But he really had no choice.

I really respected the old plant director, who still worked in theplant office but as an ordinarycadre.

Heconsultedhimonmajordecisions.The old plant director later did some manual labor, and was sent to a May 7cadre school.1Later he was transferred to another unit.During the shortperiod I was plant director it was almost impossible to manage the plant.Workers had no discipline, and transport wass in disorder.

Their plant didn'tshut down, because it had plenty of raw materials on hand, and other rawmaterials continued to arrive from overseas companies with whom they had contracts.There were two factions in the plant, but I was not inclined towards one orthe other.

He put technology first, not politics.Compensation, Work Discipline, Work Habits(12/27/79, 2.5 hrs.)

Workers and cadres both have poor work habits.  For example, cadrescome to office punctually, leave on time, but have very poor work efficiency.Oftentheyread'referencenews'(cankaoxiaoxi)duringworkhoursattheirdesk.

-2-This is because the paper is interesting,and has outside news.  with workers,the problem is that work is not related to pay.

Whether you finished 15packages or lo, the pay is the same if one's grades are the same.1Nomatterhow hard you work, the compensation is the same. So workers purposefullytake their time at work.This is not because workers talk together and con-sciously plan this kind of slowdown.It is an attitude problem cause by acomplex of material (wuzi) problems.

The first material problem is the wage problem.

So many workers arestuck at the same pay levelfor a number of years.Thismeansthatworkersofdifferent abilities stay at the same pay grade, so how can a worker put outeffort inthissituation??There are also the examples of apprentices gettingthe same pay as their masters after only l yr. of training.Also workers ofdifferent abilities, performing different jobs of different importance andlevels of responsibility, were getting the same pay.

Readjustments:There were no readjustments for over a decade.(Cadresgot one around 1965, and then in 1978.:In between there was no major readjust-

For example, if you graduated and began work in 1965, youment in wage levels.would likely not have gotten a raise for l2 years.1For workers,asidefrom

automatic raises for workers from grades one to two, whichthe yearlyis an easy step to make, there were no major across-the-board adjustment: from1966-77.There was a readjustment starting in l977.So there is a large logjamat grade 2, because there were no major readjustments for grade 2 and abovefor Il years.  It does6 not take a readjustment to raise workerssfrom1to2.

This is a bigproblem because a man's family situation changes greatlyfromthetimehefirst: enters the work force.When he's young and single, heis grade 2.Ten years later he has a wife, kids, and he is still grade 2.Ininformant'scasee(technicalcadre)，hegot46¥rightaftergraduationin1964.After working one year he was raised automatically to 56.Not until1977 was he raised to 62¥.Of course there wereother sourcesof income--they were given electricity fees (50% of monthly bill), a supplement of2 mao a day for working with poisonous chemicals, and his medical fees werepaid.EBut this didn't increase over time, and wasn't disposable income.Hemarried in l974, so there was no great hardship on his family--especially sincehis wife also worked.

This frozen wages problem was therefore a common one to both workersanda cadres.There were two sides to the problem.l)some people dorelativelycomplex work, others do simple work, but the same pay.22) two workers in thesame unit at the same pay grades doing the same type of work--one can workhard and the other loaf, but they still get the same pay.

The second material problem is housing.Some people's housing problemsare not solved so it influences their work This is caused when employees havechildren yet can't get assigned to larger quarters.This is common.Third,there issthe commodity supply problem.Major commodities are rationed andsupplies fixed--grain oils, sugar, pork, fuel, cloth.  Are these rations

(Informant laughs)enough?

The most important problem in rural areas isgrain.If you have a lot of people in your family1 who don't eat a lot--kidsunder l2, old folks, then grain is enough. But if you have a lot of adults,a real problem develops.

This is because the adjusted increments byage

Thegroup are not enough.There is a similar problem with oil and fuel.problem is not so much that supplies are tight.jIt is basically enough, justthat it is a low living standard.iThe only way to increase supplies is bythe free market, but these prices rise year by year.Or one can go throughthe back door， either through friends6 and relatives, or through ones personalstatus.On the free market side, the problem is inflation.

-3-

Fourth is the problem of children's education and employment.A11children are sent down after middle school (to the countryside).

The problemis getting them back to the city and into a job or a university.

Fifthis the problem that families are often separated because husband and wifeare not always assigned to work in the same cities.

As far as cadres go, class lines have affected the work of relativelyolder university graduates. people who often have bad class backgrounds.Theydon'tt give important work to these kindsof people， and often don't listen to

This is a common problemwhat they have to say.

Thisaffects6 their morale.for intellectuals.A burden especially is a political campaign is in swing.Thisoccursdespite theclaimedpolicythat it ismoreimportant toconsiderone's political expression (biaoxian) rmorethanone'sclassdesignation(chushen).But many cadres in the Party still do thingss this way.

'Bad'class designationsare landlord, rich peasant, capitalist, those who worked for the KMT. 'Good'class designationss are worker, PLA, cadres, poor and lower middle peasant.The meaning of all this is that when a campaign comess it is the intellectuals andcadres who are always criticized--especially the older ones with bad backgrounds--who suffer.

Sotheseintellectuals, in reasearch institutes, technical departments,etc.，fear political movements.For example, during the cultural revolutionthey often referred to 'stinking intellectuals' (chou zhishi fenzi)， but nowthe problem has eased because intellectuals are important for the 4 modernizations.Some cadres in Peking had a counter-term for 'stinking intellectual'.Theysaid 'stinking beancurd' (chou doufu)--it might smell bad, but it tastes good.Disincentives, Punishments(l/2/80, 2 hrs.)

There are no 'firings' in China (jiegu), but there are 'expulsions'(kaichu)..But expulsions are for serious political mistakes, and must beapproved by upper levels above the enterprise.Expulsions include: recordingthe matter in ones personal dossier, decreasing salary, demotion in title,transfer to a different unit, to different kindI of work.

But there is a cumulative continuum of punishments,cdepending onseverity of problems.The first step iss'criticism' (piping)， relativelymild in ones work group.:Secondismoreseriouscriticismn(pipan).Thirdis a transfer to another job in a different factory or to manual labor inthe same factory, while retaining one'ss wages (often this will occur for a workercriticizing a leader in an unauthorized wallposter).

Fourth, they will eitherdemote, lower the wages, or change the work assignment of someone, or anycombination of the above measures.

Theycan alsoextend the amount oftime beforezhuanzheng, or extend apprenticeship period.Fifthisto be undersupervisionnwhileremainingin the plant (liuduii chakan) ,or being undersupervision while remainingin the party(liudang chakan).This is foraperiod of 1-2 years, and isthe last step before expulsion. ILowering wages;etc.,aas in the fourth stepabove, is also possible at the same time.There are no special peoplee assigned to supervise or watch thesepeople, thisjustmeanss that at the end of the year the masses and the leadersassess one's political expression.

The person writes a report and a writtenself-examination and turns it over to the party branch or political department,or to a work team.

The most important factor is that a person recognizeshis error.Leaders usually don't want to extend the problem, so they don'tusually drag out the period of supervision if a contrite self-examination issubmitted.Thefinalsanctionis expulsion.

This is for serious mistakes.The person is removed from theenterprise and from the entire industrial

For serious errors,system, ssometimessentbackK to original family village.one doess not go through all the above steps, but directly to expulsion.If you don't have a commune or home village, they send you to find employment

-4-in collective enterprises, and must find the job yourself.sSince theseenterprise are a kind of dumping ground, the class backgrounds of thepeople who work in these enterprises is very complicated.They also include peopleewhoresist workassignmentsand beingsent tofrontier areas, and also people who have been expelled from other plants.Also released labor camp prisoners.State-owned enterprises cannot hirethese expelled employees.These are all internal contradictions amongthe people.For more serious offenses, one can go directly to labor reformcamp if the problem is declared one between the'people' and their 'enemies'

It often happened that people would be transferred for revenge.You can't lower wages, demote, because this would be too obvious.Also youneed higher level approval for thisandneedtostatereasons. So usuallyif acadre had it in for someone he would look for an excuse to transferthem out of the unit, if possible to a harder job in a tougher kind offactory.

This happened often.

It is very ccomplex to decide on punishment to give someone.Thereare no fixed rules governing this.In a political campaign the 'cliamte'(qihou) will usually determine the severity of punishments, and theconception of what is a crime for which people can be punished.AAlso theseverityoftreatmentdependssometimes6 on class background of the accused.For example, in one instance that he remembers, duringJ an anti corruption campaignof which there are many, there was a case where one bureau official stole

If this had not been during a campaign, he mightover lo,0oo. He was shot.only have been criticized.

Types of mistakes(cuowu) for which one can be punished: l) politicalthought (sixiang), 2) economic corruption, 3) technical mistakes (ie. ifa design is bad on a motor, and it explodes, or a bridge collapses--this isprofessional negligence.

Example， in his factory they built a meeting hall,but the acho was real bad.The designer was demoted.

4)'workstyle', whichincludes 'lifestyle'.The most common problem here is extra-marital sex.None of these steps apply to workers who simply don't work hard.Workersoften fake illnesses to get sickleave, and then go out to do other things.If they are caught, they only get a light criticism (piping).There arecriticisms, both1 piping and pipan, continually.1But the more seriouspunishments are quite rare.

There was a worker in the purchasing department,

Someexamples:whowasoriginallyanother plant'sassistantdirector.His mistake was havingaffairs with 2-3 young women in the factory.1He had to change jobs becausehis reputation was lost in the original factory.People would not listen tohim.This was a transfer with demotion.An example of transfer without

Within his lab was a skilled worker.demotion:

His work was bad.Hewasa little dumb， did not work hard.SSo he was transferred to regular work in theshops, without cut in pay. He often slept on the night shift.1Later hiswork still didn't improve, was still very lazy, and didn't do any work at all.So since he could not be fired, demoted, etc. for just this, theywaiteduntilthe local light industry bureau ordered the transfer of several workers toanother plant. !Then they dumped this problem worker on the other plant.Sometimes a plant official will tell a bureau a worker is useless and theydon't want him, so later he might be transferred.

Transfers can also be used when there are conflicts, or when a

The leaders can get the worker transferred.worker criticizes his leaders.An example.There was a demobilized soldier working in the factory around1977 and he got into a fight, was criticized later by the PartyI secretary.He then attacked the Party secretary and threatened to twist his neck.He was transferred later on.  I says there is no way to expel a person forlaziness or poor work. It is impossible.Can do other less serious things,

-5-

This most serious punishment is saved for corruption,but cannot expel.crimes, political errors, and for victims of campaigns.Temporary and Contract Labor

(l/12/80 2.25 hrs.)

This category of workers can be fired (jiegu) unlike permanentworkers who, when removed， are 'expelled' (kaichu).There are severaltypes of non-permanent workers.FFirst is 'seasonal' (jijie) labor.These are people seasonally hired, from september-february of each year;for example, during the sugar cane harvest.1During this time sugarprocessing factories began to work very hard.During the rest of the yearthey do other kinds of work, like making paper, alcohol, wax, and othersidelines.But during the sugar season they need a large influx of labor.This is also true for canning factories.

Where do seasonal workers come from?

They are people from citieswith no fixed jobs, some who live on temporary jobs, some who have beenexpelled from state-sector jobs.Also there are some from rural areas.The factory gets them by notifying thee labor bureau, whichnotifies basic-level street associations in the same cities.The massorganizations under these street committees then get the namesof workersand submit them to the factories.

The factory then decides on the basis ofwho worked well the last time (if they know the person), whether or not they

The factory then notifies the labor bureau of its needs, thewantthem.labor bureau being that at the level which supervisess the factory.

These workers are paid by the day at a rate which approximates agrade 2 worker, and they get overtime pay.

Work discipline among theseworkers is poor.

They fight and quarrel among themselves, steal and go tothecanteenalot.It is not unusual for them to be fired for thesee things,even during rush periods.He knowsabout thisbecauseasugar plant wasnearhis fertilizer plant in the suburbs of Canton.

He also went to a numberof factories while travelling around.

Temporary (linshi) workers.This is simpler than contract work.They hire these people temporarily for 5-l0 days or so.

They do 'odd jobs'

The time.:and numberr of people is not fixed,(zagong).

Sweep, clean, etc.not under the state labor quota, and the money does not come from the planned

Their wages come from production expenses.(this is true alsowage bill.for seasonal workers).They use the same method to find these workersas theydo seasonal workers，except theyfirst get permission from the Laborbureau, then directly call labor service stations and have them send overa few workers.Labor service stations handle temporary labor only, whilemass organizations handle seasonal workers.  Also temporary workers don'tdo regular work--run machines--as do seasonal workers.

Wage levels are aboutthe same as for seasonal workers--equivalent to grade 2 whencalculated ona monthly basis.People without jobs in a neighborhood sign up with thelocal labor station, under the local neighborhood committee.Whentheywork, a certain % is taken out of their wages as a management fee.Eachstreet committee office hassalaborservicestation.

Seasonal workers donot pay any management fee.

Contract(hetong）laborhasaffixed period of work--l month, 2 months,6 months, a year.These contracts are signed between factories and communesusually, but sometimes contracts are not signed.  At times they also signwith street committee offices, but rarely.Theydothesamejobsasregularworkers.  If a factory can manage to get its labor quota raised, then it oftenwill rely on some of its better contract workers, and make them permanent

Contract workers are often tola that if they work well, there is a chanceones.to become a permanent worker. So work discipline and behavior is better amongthese than among temporary and seasonal workers.Contract workers are usually

-6-paid at the level of a grade 2 worker. But they give a portion of their wagesto their commune brigade.Some of their wages are paid directly to the brigade(30-40%), but the rest is given to the worker in cash.The money paid to thebrigade buys work pointssandgiveshisfamily7 and himself a supply of grain.Contract workers usually live in dorms.But seasonal workers do not.Sometimes contract workers get labor insurance, work clothes, and medicalexpenses, but not always. I adds that in law this is not the way it shouldbe done, but often if contract workers are injured at work, they willL secretlychange them into permanent workers and givee them insurance benefits.

Hegives the example of a temporary worker who lost an arm in his factory.and he had his expenses paid by the local labor bureau and is now a doormanat the factory.

Generallysspeaking, ffringe benefits vary, and depend on the terms ofthe contract.This is specified beforehand.. So it is not always certainwhat fringe benefits a contract worker will get.

But they can use the clinic,canteen while in plant.

Ifaplantdecidessthatitdoesn't needpermanentworkers, it must notify upper levels and have them transferred to otherunits, but this is not true for non-permanent workers.Non-permanentworkersdo not get hardship welfare supplements either.

(1/23/80, 2 hrs.)Cultural Revolution

There were two factions in the plant, the Red Flag, and theDistrict Headquarters (East Wind).They were split over which of theleading cadres to purge.People decided who to criticize on the basisoften of informal relations with leaders.  1Leaders of factions vied for thesupport of leaders by talking with them and asking them to attend theirmeetings. Gradually factional relations formed, informally, but not outin the open.

Thiss usually occurs with First Party Secretaries.

At the beginning, you could separate factional leaders by theircharacteristics, but gradually these distinctions became less clear. (0lderworkers, CYL members, 1union activists tended, to join

relatively conservativefactions, while youngworkers were more radical.

There was also a fairlysizablee"teadrinkingfaction" (he cha pai).When factional activities began,

The size of this group depended on the degree of activismthey went home.in the factory.

The more activism there was, the fewer that were middleof the roaders.

Activists would often pressure people to join.

At the beginning，tthe activists criticized the 'four olds' and the'monsters and demons'(niu gui she shen).These were people with bad markson their records--KMT connections, landlord background, etc.

They werestruggled（dou).At first just criticized, but later paraded in the streetswitha hat on.This also happened to peoplee of bad class background, butwho were not actually former landlords, etc.This later developed into asituation where they criticized those in power taking the capitalist road.Every put up wallposters, criticized this and that cadre, and left theplant for 'exchanges of revolutionary experience'.The anarchism at thetime, I says, was just like that they rnow have in Iran.

Most important targets were the first and second party secretariesand the plant director.

They also wrote wallposters against other lowerlevel cadres and staff, but usually didn't struggle them.

The staffparticipated, but only passively.Production gradually dropped off asfactional activities increased.Workers started to go on exchanges ofexperience, and other factories stopped providing raw materials, and therewere transport problems.There were no striking problems due to activityamong their own labor force.  In his factory the problems were due to thereflected influence of factories disrupted elsewhere in the system.

The-7-worst time was the period of armed struggle in Canton, l967.Establishment of Revolutionary Committee

They had PLA representatives come to the plant for a period duringl968, they gave power to the Revol.committee but they didn't stay. In Canton,if you had a small plant and things were fairly normal, the PLA wouldn't stay.The Revolutionary Committee was established in l968, after Mao said theRC was good. Basically the same leaders as before, only now power wasexercisedinadifferentform.When the PLA first came，ttheyweretoldtoform a leading group of production (shengchan banzi)， of about 5-7people.The members were either shop directors or staff members. Informantwas selected chairman of this group, and was called 'plant director' (changzhang）.The old cadres had stepped aside.The PLA came, organized a meetingwherepeoplee were selected for this production leadership group.

The PLAorganized and controlled the meeting.

Workers raised their hands to showapproval of the nominees.(Candidates were earlier solicited by shop directors,there were more candidates than for offices.rhese people were all familiarwith production, and they could handle the job as well as any partyIsecretaryor plant director.?There wasstilla party secretary and a party committee,and they still had their own organizational life, but their reputation hadfallen, they didn't say much and kept quiet, staod aside.

Then the RC was set up, on the basis of an order from the Provincialbureau.At that time, tthere were a lot of transfers of those leading cadreswho were criticized as capitalist roaders wrongly.Often this just involvedtrading leaders with another unit, but very ffewstayedintheirformerfactories.People started to be sent to May 7 schools (staff members, likethe informant), on a rotating basis. Three mos. to a year--not a fixed period.When the RC formed, its leader was the new Party secretary who had come tothe plant.It had eight members.The director was the new party secretary.One factional leader was a vice-head. One former supply cadre was a vice-head.One former vice plant director was a vice-head.  Then there were 5 members:one shop director, one group leader, and a women's,youth, and workers'representatives.

These members were selected by the leadership after discussion,and organs above the plant level chose the members.All members of theRC were chosen by upper levels.The old factory director went to a May7cadre school, as did many other leading cadres. Generally, they stayed thereuntil there was a new assignment for work.1If there was no new assignment,they stayed.

They tended to pile up）intheschools.In his plant thedirector eventually was assigned to a leading position in a bureau.  Theway the RC led production was basically the same as before.Thereweremanymeetings, but the Party Secretary was basically in charge.  About l969production was finally restored, but in other problem areas--Sichuan,Jiangxi--they had problems until the l970s.

At the end of 1969, informant moved to a newly built AluminumPlant in Guangdong, also under provincial administration.  So when thepost-Gang of 4 movements came, there were no real factional problems,criticisms, promotions, since they didn't: have any history.

But whenthey heard the Gang of 4 fell,they had a big banquet among the cadres,ate a ton and drank up all the wine in the province.

When he moved to the new plant, he was in charge of lab work.First he eatablished the lab by travelling around to buyequipment，laterhe was lab head. In his region, they combined tech. and administrativecadres into one scale. He was 20 or 2l, can't remember clearly.

This isaround 68. The only raise he got was when he was automatically promoted

-8-(zhuanzheng) after his first year as a practicing technician.Thenhewasraised again in l977, right before he left.  He kept the same wage gradethroughout， despite the job changes.The l977 readjustment was on thebasis of the year entered the plant, and on work performance.

-9~

描述：

