id: 7041cfa0d5
标题：Hong Kong Interviews: Informant No. 12
日期：1980-3-3,1980-3-5
是否是时间段：false
作者：Andrew G. Walder
来源：
标签：文章
书籍：Hong Kong Interviews: Informant No. 12
书籍作者：Andrew G. Walder

正文：
INFORMANT NO. 12PERSONAL DATA

Sex: FemaleAge:42

University graduate (chemical fibres)Education:Total Years Relevant Experience:14Last Year of Relevant Experience: l974

Year Left China:1979Initial Immigration Status:LegalNative Place/Overseas Connections:Shanghai native/Husband's parent in U.S.Class Background/Political Designation:

unknown

OCCUPATIONALHISTORYSUMMARYPositions Held: l) Hangzhou Chemical Fibres Textile Plant, 1961-74

a) Technician, Shift Supervisor, 196l-67b) Shop worker, 1967-69c) Staff Technician, Designing Office and Technical

Department, 1969-74Administrative Level of Work Unit/(No. of employees):

1) Municipal/(1000)Experience in Full-time Manual Labor (for non-worker occupations):

shopworker 1967-69APPOINTMENTS: 2

TOTAL HOURS: 5.5

PAGES TEXT:No.12Occupational History

(3/3/80, 3 hrs.)

The informant attended East China Textile College in Shanghai from1957 to 1961.The college's name was changed to Shanghai Textile Collegeaftertheculturalrevolution.She graduated in l96l, and was assigned tothe Hangzhou Chemical Fibres Textile Plant.  She first went to this plant to helpwith designing work for installing pipes, since the plant was still beingbuilt, but her specialty was not construction and installation but thetechnology of technical fibres.

In l963, the plant began its operations.Therewereaboutloooemployees.She had been a practicing technician (jianxi) for one year at 40.6¥, then afterone year was set at grade l3 (standard for college graduates), at 52.5¥. Herposition after work started was as a 'shift supervisor' (zhiban zhang), whichwas the effective shop director for a shift.There were three shifts in hershop, and under the shop director were three shift supervisors.Theseshiftsupervisors were in charge of all the small groups in the shop during theshift.  :So in effect, she was a leader in charge of one third of the workersin her shop. Since the shop director did mostly administrative work, the dayto day concrete leadership of the group leaders was left to the shift supervisors.

She did this work until l967, when all the technical cadres put upwallposters to volunteer to do manual labor, and so she was an ordinary workeruntil 1969, when she was transferred to do designing work in an office underthe plant directors office.In l972 she was transferred to the technicaldepartment,whereeshe also did designing work.1In 1974, she was transferredto work in Canton to live with her husband, from whom she had been separatedsince graduation from college in l96l..There she taught at a technicalmiddle school until she left in l979.Organization of theChemical Fibres Plant

Her shop was the primary liquids shop (yuanyi chejian).Sincesheunderstood the advanced technology of the shop, she was fit to lead production.She had to know when to have the machines run at a certain speed, when to runthem backwards, at what temperature, etc.You needed to know the technologyin order to lead the work of the shop.The shop had advanced technology，and60+ workers in all.

The production of the shop was divided serially into 5 production

Each small group had a group leader in charge of production, andgroups.an assistant leader in charge of livelihood and records (this person was

They also had four worker-managers in the group:a union staff member).and almost everyone in each groupohad a task to perform.The groupshad a 'welfare manager' (shenghuo yuan) who collected rice ration tickets tobe sent up to the shop office, collected together, and sent to the canteento buy meals.The 'propaganda leader' (xuanchuan yuan) wrote notices, orders,and slogans on the group blackboard.Whenever decisions were made, they wouldbe reproduced on the blackboards because there weren't enough published versionsto go around.  The 'safetyman' leads safety meetings, conducts inspectionsfor safety problems at fixed intervals.The 'attendance checker' (kaoqinyuan) kept records on people's absences, tardiness, and the time they leftthe shop floor.Therewere also8communist youthleague members in hershift, but they did nothing special aside from the organization's work,which was propaganda.Party members in the shop had a special role toperform，eespecially in carrying out party line.All of the group leadersunder her were party members, and other party members, if of low educationallevel, would be one of the four worker-managers.

-1-Pumary Flvids Shop Orgzni2atrorz/ SHrvcture

党支部书记车问主任

1

办公室

丰问技术员副主任

[工会、共青团，学刁，侍卫]

行政干部申

Z

[三 壬汪]

大

值班长/1组长

Production meetings were held once a week, and political studystudy also, after work.About one hour for each meeting.They also hada meeting once a week for Party members and youth league members.Thesemeetings were closed to non-party members.Once a month they had a safetyclass of one hour, and also had technical study classes, both taught by a shoptechnician.This was the normal situation in the early l960s.After the cul-tural revolution they had political study almost everyday, and began touse work time for the meetings.

Every week, they also had all-plant meetingsto hear reports byI the leadership.

During the'4 cleans'movement in 1965,they startedAll-PlantCongresses of Workers and Staff. But after this, they didn't have any moremeetings.The work teams started this to arouse workers to be "the headof their own house"((dangjia zuozhu).This was not run by the Union butby the Party. since the Union was under Party leadership.

The plant as a whole wasled bythe plant director undertheleader-

Under the plant director were several adminis-ship of the Party Committee.trative and technical departments (ke)--finance, planning, technology, safety:administrative (in charge of livelihood and auxialiary services), qualitycontrol (jishu jiancha), materials, supplies, labor and wages.Below theParty Committee were several administrative offices--propaganda, organization,security departments, the CYL committee, and the Union.

Below this were 6 shops--3 service shops, and three production shops.The shop director handles livelihood cquestions, political matters, andworks closely with the Party Branch secretary, and also does some leadershipof production.?The vice-director of the shop) is concerned solely withproduction, and is responsible for overseeingsmooth production processes.For example, if shop technicians cannot repairr equipment, he is in charge ofgetting technicians from other shops to)repair--forexample,workersfromthe equipment repair shop.He is also responsible for making contact withother shops and departments about these kinds of productinn-related 1matters.

There are also administrative staff in the shops.In the directorsoffice is a procurement officer (lingliao yuan) who is connected to the supplydepartment and who handles the shop's stores.There is a wages officer(gongzi yuan) who is6connected with the labor and wages department.Thereare two kinds of shop technicians--somefor production technology (jishu),and some for production technology (gongyi).

Some handled equipmentbreakdowns，theothershandledproductionproblems.Some of these technicalcadres handled changes in product specifications dictated bythedepartments,while others handled safety regulations and inspection as directed by thesafety department, includinginspection work in the shops.They are ableto give the shift supervisor ordersto carry out.These technicians hadan office separate from the department offices.

Original Records (yuanshi jilu)--these were kept at each machine.Meter readings, accidents, problems which occurred, all the operationsof each machine were recorded on these charts.

The shop technicians didthe recordings.There were also other records kept in each production

Workers' production output, quality, equipment condition, etc.group.were records kept by each individual worker.

If a worker wrote falserecords, workers on the next shift would surely find out and report it.They alsohada shop）'changing of the shift record' (jiaoban jilu).Thiswas a book of records to be read by each shift supervisor when they cameto work.They summarized the overall production situation.

Shift Supervisor's Responsibilities--At the beginning of every shift,she visited all the production groups to see if everyone was there， aandthenarrange totransfer other workers from different groups tofill in empty places.Second, she inspects production situation in each small group, makes sure every-

-21thing is going according to the plan in each group so that the overall produc-tion process can proceed smoothly and in a balanced way.TThere were key areasshe had to inspect at given hours--check gauges, etc., to make sure everythingwas proceeding ok.She handled the transfer of people do different workposts (between production groups).sShealsohadtoconvince people toaccept transfers.'This was difficult to do when transferring people to diff-icult or tiresome work. So then she would have to do ideological work toconvince them.Usually they listened, because if they didn't the personcould be criticized in group meetings as someone who sabotaged production.During the CR, people didn't listen to orders at all, and production wasthrowmintodisorder.1Attheendof theshift，shehadtowriteashift-change report, and write reports requesting materials, labor, repairs, andshe also reports todepartments toask them to solve problems she is unableto handle herself.Wagesand Bonuses

In l96l, she entered the plant, and was given a raise in l962 whenshe became a full-fledged technician.  AAfter that she got no raise until l978,when (while working in Canton) she was raised to level l2, at 68.Therewas a wage readjustment in 1963 for people who entered before 1958. In 1978,the readjustment had to do with years of work. In her case, it was before1963. In workers' case, it depended on when they were promoted to theirpresent grade.

For bonuses, they had smallL group appraisals every month before theCultural Revolution.They could nominate 6o% of the workers, then dividedthem into 3 cgrades of bonuses.  Onee every quarter they had emulation campaignsrun by the unions, and they selected 3o% of the units and individualsas'advanced'.They would receive gifts， not money.This bonus system surviveduntil the Cultural Revolution.

After the CR they divided up bonus funds intomonthly supplements, more money for lower grades of workers, and less forthe higher paid. TThere was not much money involved, about 3-5¥ a month.Rules and Regulations in the Small Group

The term 'systems of rules and regulations' (guizhang zhidu)includesthe following things:1)safety regulations, 2) technical regulations (how toproduce things), 3) individual responsibility systems, 4) rounds inspectionsystems(xunhui jiancha zhidu)--each person has a certain number of things toinspect every shift, 5) tests for workers skill and knowledge, 6) attendanceregulations.  These things are all handled by people within the small group.The shop director and shop technicians handle safety and quality inspection.All of these rules and regulations are set by the departments.Four cleans Movement

The 4 cleans movement began at the end of 1965 in her plant.Workteams were sent in, and divided into groups to work on different things.They got to know the workers at first, got to know the situation in eachshop, and they organized a workers' congress.Then they investigated the dif-ferent leaders in the plant for corruption and illegal behavior--especiallythe supply department people.TThey held criticism meetings organized againstthose who were discovered in corruption or leading non-proletarian life-styles.They investigated a lot of people, in fact too many, both cadres and masses.They looked into peoples files (dangan), and especially investigated thosewith bad class backgrounds.In the production groups, they were told tocriticize at least 2 people.

She says her group could not find anyone witha problem, so they said not to look only for corruption and lifestyle problems

-3-

They suggested that this would be especiallybut also at political thought.appropriate if the person had a bad.class background. TThey would then becriticized.  The results of these criticisms and investigations woulddetermine who would be chosen to be a red guard (hang wei bing).Thosered guards who were chosen bythe work teams to participate in the movementwere few in numbers, and were chosen bythe party.They are differentfrom the rebels (zaofan pai).This four cleans movement made workers veryunhappy with the Party.

Every shift was ordered to have a struggle meetingand almost everyone was under investigation.There were wallposters, etc.Workers were unhappy but they couldn't express it.Cultural Revolution (3/5/80, 2.5 hrs.)

As the cultural revolution began the older red guards in the factorydispersed (the ones from the 4 cleans movement), and the work teams werecriticized.The red guards were leaders in putting up wallposters,were leading criticism meetings, and opposing the '4 olds'.

But they listenedtothe orders of the Party and work team.

Thetargetswerestillineffectchosen1 by the Party.In January 1967, the Shanghai Hongse Fanbao was carriedin all the papers.Hangzhou had 2 factions of zaofan pai (rebels). BFirstwere the Hongbao （泰）.There were many peasants in this faction, inadditiontoworkers.ThentherewastheShenglianzong（省联总）。Thisgroup was connected with the Shanghai rebel organization.((The Hong bao canbe translated as the 'Red rebellion',..while thesShenglian zong probablyImeans'Provincial Alliance Headquarters". These two names are shortened versionof longer titles she can't remember.)

Over9o%oftheworkersinherplantweremembersofShenglian.

Inher plant, the first and most active members of the rebel faction were thosepeople who had been persecuted by the work teams during the 4 cleans.Therebel faction gradually enlarged, partly because of pressure--you wouldbe a member of the xiaoyao pai （'free and unfetteredfaction'）if you didn'tjoin.

People alsojoined because friends had.This middle group of latejoiners was mostlymade up of technicians, and a few party members.

The conservatives6 (baohuang pai--also 'royalists'), were people whowere close to the'Party. and had good class backgrounds.They had a few smallorganizations of royalists in their plant.

They also hada 'careerists'(yexin jia), peoplee who tagged along with the party hopingJ to be promoted later.They had names like 'Gutian huiyi'（ F   ),and 'Jingkang Shan',etc.

So the rebels engaged in activities like wallposters, struggle andcriticismmeetings.Most of these activities took place outside, since 90% ofthe plant belonged to.the rebel faction anyway.

They went outside for demon-strations and armed struggle.They often left the technicians, the 'waverers'(xiaoyao pai), and the royalists in the plant to handle production by themselves,since the rebels used production time for their activities.

They struggled the following people in meetings--the leading partycadres and the work team members.

Engineers were criticized, also some tech-nicians.Plant directors and vice plant directors were also criticized,but not as seriously, since the leading people in power in the party werealready criticized.1Middle-levelcadres--shopdirectors anddepartmentheads, chief engineers, were rarely criticized. She can't remember any.Most of them were members of the rebel faction at that time.

Those who0 stood aside were thee plant director, partysecretary and vice-secretaries.The plant director was a vice-party secretary.

The rebelshad a production committee, and the members of the committee handled productionleadership after the leading cadres were forced to step aside.About 80% ofthe cadres were sent to do manual labor in the shops at that time, and peoplewho did their office work were members of the rebel faction.

-4-

The party secretary was put into an empty room for several months,could not return home, did manual labor during the day. They could not leave

He was under supervision. ?These kind of people were often beatenthe plant.while being interrogated..There was one worker who died (member of theconservative faction) after being beatenin the factory.They suspected him

There were some other pretty seriousof being a spy for another organization.beatings during this period, but no other deaths.Production Situation

The influence on production was great.  Production stopped severaltimes.At one time it stopped eompletely for almost half a month as the factionmembers of the Hongbao surrounded their plant (they were mostly peasants),anddidn'tletanythinginoroutforseveralweeks.This was in June 1967.After this, production continued, but never was completely restored. It tookmany years before it was restored to previous levels. 1After the CR many peopledemanded to be moved to different shifts, units, and often this left laborshortages in the shops.So they hired returned intellectual youths from theneighborhoods to fill the gaps.They had no training, however, especiallyfor such a complex shop. She hears that quality has to this day neverrecovered to pre-CR. levels.Military Representatives

The PLAcametothe plant right beforetheGreat Alliance wasformed.There were 3 air force officers. SShe can't remember when this was. It waseither late 1967 or early 1968.VWhen they first came, they went around andtalked with different workers, got to know the situation.  A revolutionarycommittee was formed after the (great alliance.  The PLA was responsible forits formation, and were also members.?There were leading cadres, mass rep-resentatives, and PLA representatives for a short period.  [During the CR,management systems weren't handled at all.Virtually nothing was handled inthe normal ways.Changes in Management

They had the new Revolutionary Committee at the top, and also hadRC's in each shop.  The branch party secretary was usually1 the head of theshop Rc's, or one of the vice shop directors was.Workers sat on the restof the membership positions.They were all rebel faction members.!Therewere no longer any shift supervisors. Most of the rest of the staff in shopoffices, and many of the leading cadres were sent down for manual labor(about 90% in her shop).The headof the RC in the shop became the equivalentof shop director. He was a former worker, young, and a rebel. There was alarge-scale change in leadership personnel in the shop during the CR.

Manynew cadres, young workers, were promoted to leading shop cadre positions.Old leaders, like the informant, were at first sent to do manual labor in theshops.  Gradually. one by one, they were sent back to do office work, orwere transferred to other sshops, or to other units.1Informant, for example,was transfered in l969toan office in a newly-establishedshopwhere shedid designing work.(Others transfered to municipal-level offices.

The administrative and technical departments were all abolishedduring the CR, but gradually re-established after the revolutionary committeewas set up.1Buttheir membersandleadersweren'tcompletelythesame.Often new leaders from among workers and staff (former rebels)， and new staffmembers were promoted from among the workers. When the departments re-emerged,they were not completely the same. Some were combined together.

-5-Weng Senhe, Hangzhou Rebel Leader and Informant's Co-Worker

Before the cultural revolution he was a chemical worker (huayan gongren)in a chemical analysis lab.  He was considered a skilled worker.He did chemicalanalysis.This was in informant's workshop.1He was in his 30s, but only madea salary of 30+¥, and was transfered out of her plant during the 4 cleans move-ment because he was continually complaining about his wageelevelandthetreat-

The plant, just about the time the four cleans work teamment of workers.arrived, transfered a few workers to another plant because their work andpolitical performance was considered poor.Weng Senhe was one of them.Informant knew him personally.  He was bright, articulate, and his chemicalanalysis work was always correct.TThe problem with him was that he talkedtoo much.

He wastransfered tothe Hangzhou Silk Printing and Dyeing Plant.After that he was an ordinary worker.He became a leader of the rebel faction,Hong Bao, during the Cultural Revolution.AAfterwards he became a member of theMunicipal Revolutionary Committee. After the Cultural Revolution, he was notthe chairman of the RC, just a standing committee member。1He continued to buildup relations with his own faction's members in leading positions in factoriesand also mended relations with former leaders of the opposing rebel factionin other factories (Shenglian).About the time that she left Hangzhou in l974,Weng was leading a movement, not publicly proclaimed, which she refers to

“突惠入觉”“突重提干“）。！This meansas the "shuangtu"（“双 突"two things.First, that all the old rebel members be allowed finally to enterthe Party, and that they be promoted to leading positions in their units.The argument was that these people had already made great contributions totha nation and Party, and should be allowed to enter the Party and be promoted.Many of them still were not Party members. But the Party was slow in this.Theystill adhered to the pre-Cultural Revolution rules about class background,and many of these former rebels had problems with their backgrounds.

So about the time she left, there was an effort to get these peopleadmitted to the Party, and to have these old rebel activists promoted todepartment head, shop director positions， etc.The people who were replacedduring this period were the 'revolutionary cadres' of the triple combinationof the Great Alliance period--old cadres who had survived.These old cadreswere moved to other units, shops, and positions. She heard that after i976these cadres were investigated, and those who hadn't made mistakes were allowedtostayintheParty，whileotherswerekickedout.

-6-

描述：

