id: dc68dac25d
标题：Hong Kong Interviews: Informant No. 19
日期：1980-3-21,1980-3-26,1980-3-31
是否是时间段：false
作者：Andrew G. Walder
来源：
标签：文章
书籍：Hong Kong Interviews: Informant No. 19
书籍作者：Andrew G. Walder

正文：
INFORMANT NO. 19

PERSONALDATAAge:42

Sex:MaleEducation:

College graduate (forestry)Total Years Relevant Experience:13Last Year of Relevant Experience: 1975

Year Left China: 1975Initial Immigration Status: Legal

unknownNative Place/Overseas Connections:Class Background/Political Designation:

unknown

OCCUPATIONALHISTORYSUMMARYPositions Held: 1) Peking Lumber Plant, 1963-75

a) Staff technician, Technical Department, 1963-65b)Shop technician, Plywood Shop, 1965c)Staff technician, Technical Department, 1966-68d)Worker, furniture shop, 1968-69

e)Shop technician, furniture shop, 1969-75Administrative Level of Work Unit/(No. of employees):

1) Municipal/(2000)Experience in Full-time Manual Labor (for non-worker occupations):

shop worker, 1968-69APPOINTMENTS:3

TOTALHOURS：6.5

PAGES TEXT:No. 19Occupational History

(3/21/80, 2.5 hrs.)

The informant graduated from a forestry college in l963, after a five-year course where he specialized in the machine processing of lumber.He was assigned to the Peking Lumber Factory, which was under the PekingMunicipalConstructionMaterialsBureau.It had about 2000 employees, andits main products were plywood and furniture.1He worked at this factoryfrom 1963 to 1975, when he came to Hong Kong legally.

He workedat a number of different positions during his stay in theplant.Right after graduation he worked in the Technical Department, andworked there until the end of l965. Then he was transfered to the PlywoodShop for one year, where he worked as a technician in the shop office.Then he returned to the technical department.In l968 he was sent dowm tothe shop to do manual labor in the shop where they made furniture.Aroundl969 he was returned to theshop office, as a technician. He continuedworking in this shop office until l975, but often he left the officetemporarily to take part in temporary '3-in-l' groups6(sanjiehe) whichworked on technical problems and product innovations.TheDepartmentandShopOffices

The technical department has l2-l3 people working in it before thecultural revolution, and was divided into two groups--designing (sheji)and technology (gongyi). The designing group had a 'prototype group'(yangpin zu)) attached to it which made sample products. It was mannedby workers.The technical group had a laboratory under.its leadership.

The informant worked in the technical group(gongyi zu).

They madeout the specifications6for the processing of the products--how to runthe machinery, at what settings, how long, at what speed, what kind ofglue to use in plywood, specifications for the tools and machines used.This was completely office work.

The work of technicians in the shop office was cquite different.Thesepeoplewereresponsibleforkeepinggthe machineryingoodrepairand for handling diagrams for processing products.1In this respect,shop technicians would take the drawings produced by the technicaldepartment and determine what parts would be produced, how, how many perpiece of lumber, whether or not a knot would be permissible for thatpiece, etc.In essence they took the technical drawings from the departmentand deciphered them down into a production process.He was the onlysuch person in his shop.

The shop he worked in was the 'parts shop' (peiliao chejian).Inits office it had a shop director and vice-director, a branch party secretary;an accountant, and statistician.The accountant handled money, while thestatistician handled production figures.So including the informant,thereweresixpeopleinall.(The accountant and statistician jobs werecombined into one. during the CR). The shop managed 7 production groups, andabout lo0+ workers.There were no great changes in the structure at theshop officelevel during or after the CR.There was notransfer of depart-ment cadres to shop offices.They were sent directly1 to the shop floor.

The shop director handled the entire production process.He makes surethat production is going smoothly, he transfers and assignes workers todifferent groups.

The vice-director helps him in whatever needs doing.The party branch secretary handled political meetings, campaigns, and study.Almost all shop directors are partyI members, as are many of the vice-director.Many of the vice-directors were line management before nattonalization,but duringtheCR most of these were sent downfor manual labor.

-1-WagesandBonuses

When he first started work in l963 he was a practicing technician(jianxi), and turned into a regular technician after l year.

The firstyear out of college he got about 53¥, and after one year raised to about55¥, but he can't remember clearly. He forgets what grades he was assigns,and does not remember muchnabout wage grades because he saystheywerenot much in use during the period, especially after the CR began, andpeople didn't much talk about them.(Later he remembers that he wasgrade l3 after the jjianxi period, and remained at thisgradefor hisentire career). Up until l975, there was no change in his basic wage.

There was a readjustment in wages in l963, shortly before heentered the factory.There was also one in l97l.

That year they setup year lines (l960 or l96l), and if you were still grade 2 after all these years,you were raised to grade 3.They also readjusted the wages of thosewho had moved from other factories since the last readjustment.sSo thechanges were madeeand they were paid according to standard scales for woodmachinery workers.

Before the CR, they had a bonussystem.

From plant profits each yearthey retained a fixed percentage for distribution as bonuses.The amountretained would be divided into l2 parts.:Each quarter they formed a'bonusassessment committee' (ping jiang weiyuan hui), which included leadingcadres from shops, departments, the union, the plant office, to discuss anddecide what percentage would begiven out for each of the 3 grades:1）15￥，2） 8¥，3）3。In most cases, grade 3 was the most common.Eachproduction group would discuss each person's6performance--workperformance,political study performance, attendance.  In the discussions each person getsa chance to speak about themselves.After everyone gets their time, thenothers would get a chance tocriticize andcomment on the other people.The third step is to nominate others for specific grades.

The resultsare handed over to a 'bonus assessment group' (ping jiang xiaozu) whichchecks over the liststo make sure that the same quality of people arebeing nominated at the same grade in the different groups--they makesure there are parallel criteria in all groups.A very small number of workersgot no bonus at all. These were the ones with serious work or attendanceproblems.They occassionally had arguments in bonus assessment meetings;but these were not tooserious or common.

About 1967, theycancelled this system, after they split into 2 factionsthere was no way to assess fairly.

They formally abolished the system in1968. At that time they changed to 'supplementary wages' (fujia gongzi).Every person in the factory got a supplementary wage of 4.8¥, except theplant director and party secretary.

This figure was not connected withprofit， and did not fluctuate.His plant usually made a profit, this wasits special characteristic. So he can't reallyI tell whether these wouldbe cancelled if the plant didn't make a profit.

They kept using thissystemrightup0 to the time he left in 1975.They had piece rates during1960-6l, before he started working there, and they used this method tofigure the basic wage.

There was nobaogong system where you weregivena fixed amount of time to finish a job.The baogong system was used infactories, but not usually in production work but in other types of work,like digging foundations, doingg construction，etc.They would1givesomeonea job, like digging out a hole, telling them how big it should be, howmuch time they should take to finish.1If they finished early, they couldleave early.TThe main advantage was to give workers an incentive to leaveearly

-2-Temporary andContract Labor

They had contract laborers from rural communes to do construction work,and ones from the city to do simple, non-skilled production work, when hefirst arrived in 1963.1But by l964 they never used them anymore.He does

They had a contractnot know why.There were never many of them anyway.which fixed their length of service, but he remembers little else.Firings and Discipline

There were firings in his factory, during the cultural revolution.They sent people away to do labor reform.  One fellow's crime was to opposeLinBiao.They also had one firing before the CR, before he came in l962.He had sold plywood and kept the money.He was caught and put in jail.Generally speaking, if a worker'sS work or attendance is very bad, thereeisno punishment they can give him, and they can't lower his wages.They just'give him education'. This convincing (shuofu) work is initially the job ofthe group leader.If this does not work then they turn the job over to hisclosestcoworkers.They come up to him and talk, visit his home, etc. Theytry to find out what is wrong.

They had only one person in his plant who was demoted, during the 'fourcleansmovement.This was for having irregular sexual relations with woiienwho worked in the headquarters above the factory.

Hewaskickedout of theparty, stripped of his positinn as vice plant director, and sent to do workin the shops as an ordinary worker.His wages were also reduced to workerlevel.

(3/26/80, 2 hrs.)RulesandRegulations

Quality inspection--the qualitycontroldepartment:(jianyan ke)handled quality inspections before the CR.  ?They had one administrative cadre,

One experiencedthree inspection workers, and several workers in shops.worker in the shop office, and one worker in each small group was responsiblefor qualityiinspection.(There were lba dayuan or worker-managers, beforethe CR, andwu da yuan afterwards).

These worker yuan were called'inspectors'or jianyan yuan before the CR, and'technical quality personnel' (jishu zhiliangyuan) afterwards.

Each small group person inspected work after each work process--forexample, furniture parts.1If there was a problem he reported it tothe groupleader.  1If there was a major problem, the group leader in turn may reportto the inspection department to solve the problem.

This worker-'inspector'uses his break time to do the inspecting--l5 minute periods for snacks inthe middle of each 4 hour period before and after lunch.

The inspectiondepartment's'inspection workerswouldexamine eachfinished piece of furniture before it entered the warehouse.

They roamedthrough the shops inspecting finished products.The qualityinspectionperson (zhiliang yuan) in the small group had the power to reject articles,and would use standards prepared by ministries.The lumber standards werefixed nationally, the plywood standards set by the forestry ministry, andfurniture standards were set at city bureau.

After the CR, thisSsystemwasnotadheredtoverystrictly.

Thestandards set above the plant level were not followed, each plant had theirown, and many still hadn't established new ones.AAlso, they criticizedold systems6 of rules and regulations. During the CR there was no qualitycontrol at all.

The inspection department (jianyan ke) was abolished during the CR, andits functions were given to the technical department, and this was not itsmainfunction.It was in the business of designing and setting technicalstandards, not in inspecting and enforcing these standards.The inspection

-3-department still had not been restored when he left in l975.The 3 inspectionworkers (jianyan gong) had been sent to the 3 shops involved in producingcommodities, and were assigned to the shop offices.

His own technical department had l2-l3 people in it before the CR,and during the CR they sent almost all of them to the shops for labor.Thenmany were sent back to shop office to continue designing work.  Seven orso ended up back in the technical department.The rest did designing workin the shops, and were also given the responsibility for machinery maintenance.They did basically the same work as before, except in the shops.Manual Labor for Office Personnel

Before the CR cadres participated in one half day of labor each week.During the CR everybody participated full time.  After the CR everybodyparticipated l.5 days per week.  Every cadre was given a small notebook, andhad to have it signed by the group leaders to prove that they did do the labor.Afterwards the books were looked at by the personnel department (renshi ke).If they failed to do this, they would be asked for an excuse. If theirexcuse was not a good one, the issue might be brought up at a mass meeting,but usually they would not mention names.:Ifthepersondidn'tgetanybetterabout it, they might criticize him at the meeting.This is awfully embarrassing.Union

Before the CR the union handled welfare, education, suggestions, physicalrecreation. The union structure was abolished for over 2 years during the CR.In 1969, after they established the revolutionary committee and re-establishedthe Party Committee, they finally re-established the union.It did the samework as before, but there was no longer any cultural education (reading,writing, etc.)

Workers' Congresses (zhigong daibiao dahui) met once a year, mostly tcdiscuss the coming year's plans. They had them before the CR, then abolishedthem, then restored them again in l972.Meetings

Before the CR they had 5 days of study in all--after the shift forone hour each time.  One day was for cultural education--reading and writingfor the workers.There was also math, some physics for those who were moreadvanced.  Part of the shop participated, people separated into differentclasses according to their ability.One day of meetings was the productionmeeting in the small group. One day was for political study, reading newspapersmostly,

The remaining two days were set by the above levels of leadership,and the content was set by the party leaders, depending on the currentcampaign--anti-corruption, etc.[During the CR, virtually no organized meetingsof the above sort took place, political or otherwise.1After the CR they hadsix days of political study per week, and completely abolished the culturaland technical education meetings.The Four Cleans MovementandtheCultural Revolution

There were no real four cleans activities, and there was not even awork team sent down from above.  The other 2 wood products plants in Pekinghad activities, though.

The upper levels knew the situation and decided whereto send work teams, and they did not select his plant.!The four cleansmovement began in l965 in the wood products system in Peking.

As the cultural revolution began, the relatively young workers, mostlyparty members without positions, and young cadres, first got together towrite the first big character poster critical of the party secretary.There

-4-were about l2 of these people in all .After this first poster, the nextday all the workers started putting them up.There were two officialsinvolved.The first partyI secretary was somewhat bureaucratic, and hadofficious airs.The vice-secretary was closer to the workers, and likedto talk with them.The different factions among the workers split overwhich of these two secretaries to support.

Thereevenually1developed fighting within the plant between factions.They dragged out and criticized both these party secretaries.They stoodaside and did manual labor like sweeping floors.

The plant director himselfwas not criticized seriously. and he just went down to participate in manuallabor.Also, all the department heads did manual labor for about 2 monthsin a row, and also the shop directors.At its worst, production wasdown 50-60%. This was at the beginning of 1967. By mid-1967, the'shopdirectors

and department heads returned from manual labor, and productionimproved.At the end of 1967 or early 1968, the army came and establisheda military control committee (jun guan hui).Military Control Committee(3/31/80, 2 hrs.)

There were 30 members of the PLA in the plant.Simply speaking, theirjob wass to propagate Mao Thought.But concretely their job was to get tinetwo factions together.?They propagandized against anarchism, and convincedpeople to grasp production.These PLA representatives had the power todecide political and production matters both.They decided how to forma great alliance.  !They ran the 'cleaning of the class ranks' campaign.They decided virtually all problems.They party committee by that timedid not exist.

These 30 PLA soldiers established a military control committee, and hadoneechairman,and2vice-heads.The rest were just 'deputies' (daibiao).The number of members on this military control committee gradually diminishedover time.They exercised power before the establishment of the revolutionarycommittee and the re-establishment of the party committee.They handled bothproduction and politics.This was because the party committee and all theplant directors had stood aside.They no longer had a 'factory committee'(chang wei hui), made up of plant directors, department heads, and a few

(They were mostlyselected shop directors, as they did before the CR.party members on this committee anyway).Revolutionary Committee

A 'great alliance'(da lianhe))wasformed bythe PLAthrough meetingsheld with faction leaders and persuasion.These were really a series ofpreparatory meetings for the revolutionary committee.  A name list of candidateswas developed by the PLA control committee, in consultation with the 2 factions.The list contained equal representation of the factions and other leaders.They sent a name 1ist of 25 or so down for discussion in the shops, and reducedthe list to l7 names.Then l5 of these names on the final list were electedby a show of hands in meetings within small groups throughout the plant.

Members of the revolutionary committee.There were 3 members fromeach faction, 3 PLA deputies, a former party secretary， a former plant director,a former vice-plant director, and 3 more people, but he can't remember.The headof the RC was the headof the Militarycontrol committee.Thevice-head of the RC was the vice-head of the military control committee.This was around l968. There was still no party committee, and still noorganizational. life within the party.

About a half year after the RC was established, they began the re-estab-lishment of the Party Committee, and revived its organizational life. This was

-5-1969.The revolutionary committee established a small group, all partymembers, to restructure the party.This was called the 'party organizationpreparatory group' (dang zuzhi choubei xiaozu).Non-party members did notparticipate in this process.

The chairman of the party committee, the party secretary, was alsothe head of the Military Control committee, and the head of the revolu-tionary committee at the same time.The military control committee hadby thiss time been abolished in name, but its leading members were stillin control in the plant.After re-establishing the Party Committee, theybegan restructuring the lower levels of the party organization--the

This was the period of open door rectificationparty branches, etc..where the masses could1 raise opinions on individual party members.Atthis point, criticisms still had some effect, especially since the PLA unitsfrom the outside, not the party committee, was in control.After Lin Biaodied, the PLA representatives left, and the former Plant Party secretarybecame head of both the revolutionary committee and party committee.DepartmentalStructure afterthe Cultural Revolution

Around the time of the establishment of the RC, they carried outthe simplification of administrative structures (qingjian jigou).Thelabor, inspection(jianyan), and equipment departments were abolished,and the personnel and security department (renshi baowei ke) was reducedto 2 people, where it had 5 before.

The rest went to manual labor in the

Soon after the RC was established, the personnel department wasshops.restored, and by 1973 theeequipment department was re-established.Theothers were not re-established by the time he left in l975. All extrapersonnel were sent to do manual labor.They graduallyreturnedto the depart-ments as they were needed.By 1974, however, all had been returned to office

After that, they had a rotating method of participation in manualwork.labor.

Also, 3 cadres were selected each year to go to an agricultural villagefor labor.The unit had no May 7 cadre school.Theseweremostlyforeduca-tional and administrative units.Also 2 cadres, and 3 technicians were assignedtosuburban communes on a rotatingbasis to help0them to establish and developcommune industry.

When there were many cadres'sent down' for manual labor, a fewyoung people were promoted to be cadres working in the shops, but nonewere promoted to the departments.

No, he repeats, none were promoted tothe departments, because this was for people with technical skills.1AlSO,1974-75, they had some young party cadres promoted to vice-leadershipposition in the party committee, and some were appointed to be shop directors.The work method of the departments changed after the CR.  Before cadresmade decisions based only on their own considerations.Afterwards therewere more discussion meetings to get opinions.The department heads didnot change after the CR.They also had another change after the CR.Workersand staff members did not work as hard as before.This was the result ofanarchismn and egalitarianism.

Before the CR,if you worked hard, you could get ahead.

ButaftertheCR, no.Also,there were no libraries and technical materials for them toworkwith.This was a universal and serious problem, and I says it wastypical of all factories.There were simply no clear goals, no clearcriteria for performance, and no real link of performance and promotion.So how were people promoted? On the basis of politics, enthusiasm in work,but not on technical level.Good political performancee(biaoxian） meansthat a person is patriotic, active during political movements, criticismmeetings.Were these people expressing their true feelings?(I asks this

-6-himself， rhetorically).Not necessarily (bu yiding). HHe exhibits skepticismover whether or not these people were just trying to climb upward (xiang shangpa).

Basically speaking, there were no remaining factional ties after l972which could be traced to the CR.TThereafter leaders would have people theyfavored, who they had good friendships and feelings with.They would pullthem along (la long),，and pull them up around them.1Manyof the promotionsduring the l970s were of young workers who entered the plant after l970,so they were not influenced by CR factionalism.These were the kind ofpeople raised to vice-shop director.Technical Education

Before the CR, they had some technical study classes, but most ofpart-time study was cultural education--reading and writing.  They alsohad 'technical skill exchanges' (jishi jiaoliu). which were meetingseverysunday for workers who were presented with a technical problemandquestioned on how to solve it.:It was run by the scientific and technicaleducation committee of the Peking Municipal Government.

After the CR, they abolished regular cultural and technical study.It was all politics.1But around the time he left in l975 they were preparingto establish a July 2l workers' college where young workers were selectedto attend classes half-time during the day.  But the technical levelof these classes was quite low.1Factory technicians were the teachers."Three-in-one" Technical Innovation Groups

After the CR, I participated in these regularly.Theyhadthembefore the CR, but did not call them '3-in-l'.The big change was that theyadded workers to the post-CR groups.These were temporary groups.Theywere made up of leading cadres (department or shop), technicians, andtechnical workers.  A group was established when a problem appeared, andthe shop director or department head would suggest the establishment of a groupto the revolutionary committee, which discusses the matter and decides whetheror not to establish a group. Depending on the scope of the problem and theadministrative boundary of the group, a shop director, department head, orvice-plant director will select members of the group.

The group at firstdiscusses the problem, and raises suggestions.

After the group comes up with provisional answers, they check withthe workers concerned before implementing the solution.These meetings takeplace during work hours, usually about l-2 hours long.  There were manymeetings for a given group.

Each meeting only pulis selected people awayfor attendance.The length of the group's existence is determined by thedifficulty and complexity of the problem.They vary from 2-3 months to

Who takes the place of workers when they leave theirl year and longer.posts to attend these meetings? !These attending workers are usually tech-nical repair workers (weixiu gong), and they didn't have any fized productionpost, so this usually was not a problem.The size of the group dependson the problem.It ranges from under 5 to into the teens.

Production problems in the plant:  Quality went down a bit after the CR,mainly because the QC system was not adhered to strictly.But it is hardto say about output, becausee this was figured as gross output value.

So itshard to compare, because the composition of output in terms of value per unitof input might have changed.

He does not know about  these figures, givenhis job.

-7-

描述：

