id: 41fad8648a
标题：Hong Kong Interviews: Informant No. 64
日期：1980-7-24,1980-7-25,1980-7-26,1980-7-30,1980-7-31,1980-8-1,1980-8-2,1980-8-4
是否是时间段：false
作者：Andrew G. Walder
来源：
标签：文章
书籍：Hong Kong Interviews: Informant No. 64
书籍作者：Andrew G. Walder

正文：
INFORMANT NO. 64

PERSONAL DATAAge: 34

Sex:  MaleEducation: lower middle school graduate, one year upper middle schoolTotal Years Relevant Experience:

102

Year Left China:1973Last Year of Relevant Experience:1973

LegalInitial Immigration Status:Native Place/0verseas Connections: Singapore 0S, returned 1952

OS/Revolutionary MartyrClass Background/Political Designation:

OCCUPATIONAL HISTORY SUMMARYPositions Held:  1) Auto Building and Repair Plant, Canton, 1962-64, 1967-73

a) Apprentice/repair worker, repair shop, 1962-64b) Vice Head of Revolutionary Committee, Head of Special

Investigation Group, l967-71c) Repair worker, Assistant Group Leader, Repair Shop,

1971-732) Machine Building Plant, Canton, 1965-66

a) Repair worker, Assistant Group Leader, Repair Shop,

1965-66Administrative Level of Work Unit/(No. of employees):

1Municipal Transport Bureau/(900)2) Municipal Transport Bureau/(300)

TOTAL HOURS:22

PAGES TEXT:18APPOINTMENTS:8No.64Occupational History (7/24/80, 3 hrs.)

The informant was born in Singapore in l946. His father was Dai Ziliang,a wealthycapitalist and leader of the overseas Chinese communisty in Singapore-

He was invited back to Nanking in l948 by the KMT, but refused.1HeMalaya.went to Peking in l949to participate inthe Committeee for NationalConstruction, and was the l2th ranking delegate to the National PoliticalConsultative Conference.His father died in 1952, however.The CCPdeclared him a revolutionary martyr

and gave a signed certificate fromMaoZedonghimself senttohis widow.At thattimethe statetookcareof the costs of raisingthe children of revolutionary martyrs, so hisolder sister brough himn and the rest of the children back to China in1952. All the children were covered by this 'martyr's certificate' whichwas signed by Mao, and it gave each of them 2o¥ per month as a pensionuntil the age of l8, as long as they were in school and not working.Heattended school in Canton until aagee l6，at which time he became anapprentice after the first year of upper middle school (in l962). He hada very special background (chushen)--both the best and worst possible.On the one hand, he was a son of a revolutionary martyr, while on theother hand he was an overseas Chinese.So they never completely trusted him.

His first work unit was the Canton Auto Buildingg and Repair piant,about 9o0 employees, under the municipal transport(yunshu) bureau.After 2 years,he was promoted from his job as a repairman on auto chassistoatechnicalworkerearlierthanwasusualbecauseoff good performance,and was transfered to a new machine building plant under the same transportbureau, where he was a worker in a repair group, and assistant group leader.He was not formally transfered to the unit but'borrowed'（jieyong)withthe understanding that he would return to the original unit.The machineryplant had over 300 workers.

He worked in this new unit until l967.He had been active in therebel faction--Red Flag--but was not really an extremist.His thinkinggraduallyImovedtoward a middle of the road1positionn by the end of the

In late l967 he was chosen to be a member of a worker propagandamovement.team by the members of the Military Control Group(junshi guanzhi xiaozu).Then he went to a local middle school for about 6 months.Theychose whothey thought were reliable people and trained them.

Hewasthevice-headoftheteam.

In early l968 he returned to his original unit,éand was elected asone of two vice heads of the revolutionary committee.Hewasalsotheheadofa special investigation group.He was a leader of the cleaning of the classranks campaign,. the anti-May l6 elements campaign.His power was verygreat at that time, though he was only 23 years old. He was vice-head ofthe revolutionary committee, and concentrated on work as the head of a

Then in l970, when the yida sanfan (campaignspecial investigation group.began, he stayed in the office every day for about 7-8 months to writea document, a history of the plant, to prepare for the struggle,ccriticism,and transformation part of the movement.Heisratherproud of the factthat nobody committed suicide in the unit while he washead of the specialinvestigation group, but later during the yidasanfan,whenhe was notdirectly involved, 3 people killed themselves.

He gradually became disenchanted with this,aand his thinking changed over

He did not like investigating people for all kinds of small thingstime.and then accuse them of serious crimes, and see them commit suicide.1Hewasupset about this, but the Party leader in the plant made light of this, saying

-1-"10 deaths is just a single wound", meaning that in a revolution people die.Also, about this time his younger sister, a university student, went insaneas a result of being struggled as a capitalist's child duringgthecleaningof the class ranks campaign.?This had a strong affect on his thinking.Heno longer had a taste for this kind of thing.So after he turned thedocument in to the special investigation group）hwad and the revolutionarycommittee head, he told him he had seen the movement through to completion,and didn't want to be an official, and volunteered to return to the shopfloor. So he went back to the group whose leader was his old master from hisapprentice days, and he was chosen assistant group leader.This was l97l.

In l972, he applied to leave China.Since his status was special andhe had familyconnections with people in the National People's Congresslike Liao Chengzhi, and the head of the Democratic League, Hu Yuzhi, bothof whom knew his father and family.

His father had also been a member ofthe democratic league. :So he wrote letters to these people, as did hisolder brother who was now head of Singapore's overseas Chinese organization.So in November l973 his application was approved and he came to Hong Kong.His application was pushed through in Peking, not by his unit.Wages

(7/25/80， 3 hrs.)

Apprentices, when they first start， are paid 20¥, 22 and then 25¥over the next two years.

Eachyearthey1must be assessed in their smallgroups.The results are written down in a report and then given tr the shopparty branch secretary, who discusses the case with the shop director. TThen

Afterhe has to approve, but he rarely overturns the group's discussion.

The wages depend on the wage region, city,that you are a grade l worker.and industrial sector, with heavy industry being a few yuan higher:thanlight industry.In his plant this was 39.5 ￥ for a grade 1 worker.

From 1956-59, after the apprenticeship period was firished, they assessedpeople's ability and could set them at grade one or higher.After thePeng Dehuai affair and the beginning of the three years of economichardship, they had everyone set automatically at grade l. Actually, thedocument thatcamedowninl960or sodidnotactuallychangethe previouspolicy, it just said you can't increase total wage bills in plants.So ineffect this prohibited setting people any higher.There was also a regulationsaying that after one year they should be given a technical test bythe

But aftertechnical department, and then raised another grade if they passed.

The1960 there was nothing to test, since everyone would certainly pass.definition of a grade one technical worker in the wage grade technicalstandardshandbook wasthat the personcould finisha jobunder the directionof the master.Grade 2 was that they could finish the work if the master handedit over to them.sSo in effect everyone would easily pass, so they just gaveup testing and raised people automatically.After four years of working theycould certainlyreach grade 2 requirements.

During the periodd l966-7l there were some workers who were stuck at gradeone, but were ordinary workers or were skilled workers set at grade l whohad not gone through the apprenticeship period.

They were in bad luckbecause there were no readjustments during this period, yet there was nodocument covering them as there was for workers going through the apprenticeship

They simply fell between the rules and had bad luck.program.

The proportion of skilled workers to ordinary workers depended on thetechnical nature of production.Eighty percent of the workers in his plant

The ordinary workers did heavy manual labor and servicewere skilled workers.work like moving and sweeping.No technical skills were required.?Therewere a few young workers who were ordinary workers.These were older workerswho never had any technical skill, or were women from households.As time

-2-goes by the ordinary workers became fewer.There are more of them inlight industry.

They had a readjustment around the time he came in l963, and did nothave another one until l973, when years of service (gongling) was themost important criteria.  So most workers were grade three and below, thelargest amount at grade 2. From l963-73 nobody got a raise at all. So agewas the best indicator of one's standard of living.AAnd the best off werethe middle-aged technical workers.Contract and Temporary Labor

They never had any contract workers in their factory, even though itwasquitecommonfor themtobe hiredfrom the communes.They also hadcontract workers come from service stations (fuwu zhan) on the streets.They did have temporary workers, they were assigned by the labor bureau.After the cultural revolution they had even more, because of the youngpeople returning from the countryside.These people were'registeredworkers'((dengju laodong renyuan).They are assigned by the Cantonlabor bureau, which handles work assignments of all those people withoutworkoreducationalunits.If you don't have a unit, they handle your case.These registered workers include returned youth, overseas chinese, peoplewho had moved from other cities, people who have turned down work assignments.They register at street service stations, and the names go to the bureau.

They usually don'tt work for morethana year.]But if they work longer itis because they are good and have a goodchance of becoming a regular workerduring the next time the factory gets permission to expand its labor force.They did ordinary work mostly, but there were some technical workers amongthem.SSome made more than others, largely due to skills.They usuallymadearound40￥.There were very few of these workers in the plant, lessthan 5%, and there was no basic change in the system while he was there.It was not cancelled during the cultural revolution.Punishments, Discipline

They had legal

Punishments dependd on the nature of the problem.violations, also political violations.  lFor these two things, thesecurity department of the factory, not the shops and groups, handledthe problem. TThe others were work-related problems--attendance, workattitude.(Others had to do with violatingthe technical responsibilitiesof your job (zeren), and also carelessness(shuhu) on the job.Technicalresponsibilities include quality, following specifications.TThe secondincludes forgetingg to do things like fasten down a part of the auto, forget

Finally, there are morals (daode) problems.to put oil back in the motor.This includes lifestyle problems, sex, cheating others.

For moral problems, the first step0 is the self-criticism,ssecond is theshop offers opinions in your case to the plant, then the plant decideswhether or not togive a warning(jinggao）.This is a form with spacesfilled out by the plant director and the head of the security department.It is affixed with the seal of the security department and plant director,then put into the person's file.This stays in your file all you life, andeven after you die this file remains on you, they never destroy it.Thefinal punishment is to turn the case over to public security, in which casethe legal system handles you, and you can be sent to labor reform, but they

The workers' files are handled by the securitydidn't call this firing.department. The cadres'1by the organization department.

You cannot lower a worker's wage.Youcan only remove a worker fromthe plant on criminal offenses. So in effect you can't: expel a worker.There are also workers who are under control (guanzhi), they continuallyhave to report all their movements and behavior to security of the plant

-3-for a period of time.

This is the lightest criminal punishment, and this doesnot include expulsion.

For careless ness6 or violating technical responsibilities, first isa written self-criticism，tthen it is read to the group.Then the groupexpresses their opinions and criticisms about his behavior.TThen a reportgoes to the shop director, who will write a commentary (pishi) on it,usually saying'his work is usually good, no need for punishment'. Thesekinds of things do not go into the file.TThe most common types of punish-ment in the plant was self-criticism in the small group.Small Group Management (7/26/80, 3 hrs.)

There are three leaders.A group leader, assistant group leader,and a political study leader (called the gonghui zuzhang).

Thegroupleader is almost always a party member and is usually over 30.Theassistantgroup leader is usually an experienced worker, but not necessarily a partymember.The political study group leader is usually a youthful activistwho is either a party member or youth league member.Theshopleadershipappoints all three of these people.

The group study leader leads all political study meetings.1He setsthe agenda after getting orders from the bramch secretary, leads thediscussions, writes up reports to the secretary on the results. In effecthe is under the leadership of the shop branch party secretary. The informantheld this position while he was an apprentice.The reports they send to theparty secretary are the notes they have taken on what everyone says inthe meetings.If there is no young party activist in the group they willtransfer one in from a group that has two.

The group leader and vice-leader are to make sure that the quotas arefulfilled. The group leader takes part in manual labor, but does not have afixed post.  Sometimes he fills in for absent workers. Sometimes he isbusy solving problems, helping run the group, but has no concrete tasks.He has no quota to fulfill. Sometimes the same is true for the assistantgroup leader, but this depends on the group's work.Thegroupleaderalsohasanother responsibility, that is to take care of technical problems withmachines in the shop.He is to keep an eye on situations and solve them ifhe can.  The assistant group leader works with the leader, helps him in thesame kind of work.He usually is someone who the Party is training forfuture promotion.

They had worker:'yuan' in his production group before the culturalrevolution.1But they only had group leaders, the study leader, and a

)， who was undersecurity person (zhi an baowei yuan治安 1承 卫员the security department, before l963 or so.Around1964or sotheyexpandedto several more yuan in the groups.

The security worker (zhian baowei yuan))wastheeyesandearsoftheSecurity department. He did basic level investigation work for them.Thework of the security department began to increase around l96l when Mao startedto raise slogans about class struggle. When this started, securitydepartment personnel had low grades, low status, and little power.

In each shop there was a worker who was appointed 'security chief'(zhibao zhuren)， which was not a full time office position but something hedid in his spare time. He led all the security7 workers in thee small groups.

None of these people gotHe in turn reported to the security department.out of their normal work responsibilities, were not cadres, just informants.All of these workers were considered politically reliable, and were partymembers.

Why is a person unhappy with the amount of food he has to eat?Whyis he expressing contrary opinions about things? The security department

-4-would hear these things and put the material in people's files.Theydidnot come to any conclusions, they just put their doubts and suspicions downon paper and put it in the dangan.He knows this because during the culturalrevolution, as leader of the special investigation group, he read manyof these kinds of things.This kind of material was used during the fourcleans and cultural revolution and it was very intimidating then whenpeoplee were confronted with things they said five years before.

They also had the power to organize investigations about people who theyhad doubts about--into their family history andclass backgrounds.Generally,the security department was to guard the buildings, fixed capital andstate property, also to make sure the constitution and laws were followedin general.As an indication of the power of the security department:ifthe head of the production department asked him where he went after work,he wouldn't have to answer, but if someone from the security departmentasked, he did not dare not answer, he had to.His major point is thatthis organization, originally established to enforce the laws, later

Since thedeath of Maotheyhavebegan an organ for suppressing people.reduced in power.

The 'production safetyman' (shengchan anquan yuan)

Other 'yuan':is responsible for safety work in the group.1If you can't smoke, he is sup-

He is supposed to know safety regulations and seeposed to remind workers.that they are followed byithe remaining workers.He also is supposed to

He raises suggestions at meetings.raise suggestions for new safety rules.This was the way it was supposeditobe.Inn reality these people were not

They got no extra moneyparticularlyI active or Qutstandingintheir work.for this, no supplement or favors.

The quality inspector (zhiliang jiancha yuan) raises opinions andsuggestions about completed product quality.He has a fixed inspectionroutine.At the end of each day he would pull out selected pieces from thecompleted lots, and subject them to simple tests for quality.

He is not underthe leadership of the group0leader--he couldn't be.

But he was under theleadership of the quality inspection workers at the shop level who were undershop leadership.This person has a fairly high technical level.

The cost accountant (chengben hesuan yuan).

Every day in the autorepair group , each worker in the repair group filled out a form sayinghow many hours they worked on each car, and they signed it.The accountingperson takes all these forms from workers, adds them up on a form for theentire group which summarizes the number of worker-hours (gongshi) spent on eachcar.He uses about half an hour work time on this, starts about 4:30 in theafternoonright before the endof the shift.Then he sends the forms to anaccountantattheshopo office who fills out a report for the entire shop.The form filled out bythe workers also includes non-production time spentin performing special 'yuan'duties, talking over quality problems with

Workers generally

Thisisonecategoryffilled in on the form.workers, etc.did not write false figures in these reports because there was no reason to,you wouldn't be penalized. He did not calculate materials used, just took

You can also call this man the'timekeeper'((laoqin yuan 老勤员hours.

Some groups do not need to calculate costs or work hours like this.

This is the caseTheyy don't need small-group level economic calculation.for production lines, chemical and steel plants.When this is the case,this person becomes a timekeeper (laoqin1 yuan, or attendance keeper).

These yuan are selected after groupdiscussions, and approval of theshop.But:the shop usually does not overturn these nominations.Usuallyif workers object strongly to someone, they will not be selected.1But thegroup leaders are all appointed by the shop leadership.

And the securityworker in the group is also appointed,by the security department itself.

-5-Meetings

At the very least, there are production meetings at the beginning,end and middle of the month.‘The meetings center around the completionof the group'ss productionquotasfor the month.The beginning of themonth meeting is to discuss the month's quotas and prepare for completion.At the middle of the month they assess progress and if they are behind,they discuss problems and what is wrong.Atthe endof the monththeysumupotheir work and experience, and analyze their performance.

These meetings are held during off-hours, from 5pm to 6pm, after

Other than this, there were no other fixed meetings, but they didthe shift.have meetings for birth control now and then, and they also had specialmeetings for different purposes--for campaigns to practice economy, for example.Campaigns for safety were held from time to time, and also on quality.It depended on the particular problem at the time.There were meetingsfor wage readjustments, and meetings to get workers to support the jobassignments of their children who have just graduated from school.The morehe thinks about it, the more he remembers all kinds of extra meetings,besides production and politics.  There were usually 3-4 meetings per weekfor one hour after work.Quotas

The quotas for groups were set at the shop level and given to the groups.The group leaders knew ahead of time what the quotas would be, had alreadygone to meetings with other group leaders and shop directors to distributethe quota. If there were any objections, they were ironed out beforehandby discussions with shop leaders.These group leaders are not stupid,they know they have to check out these quotas beforehand and ask opinions.Sending down quotas is a process, they just don't send down orders.Thatway contradictions between shop0and group0 leaders will not arise.'Theshop leaders have to make quotas based on knowledge of conditions in thegroup. He feels this is a good method, very effective, it eliminatesproblems.

Quotas are set at the group level, not at the individual level.TThiswas true both for his auto repair group and his machinery factory. Theycouldn't set them at the individual level bec aise workers were at differentpay grades, some were older than others, and the age and wage criteriacontradict one another. Young workers are paid less, but can do more.So how can you set a quota? Also, it was not necessary because the individualbonuses were so small.Theydidhave individual quotas incollectivefactories.

Because the quotas are set by the month, people concentrate on finishingbytheendofthemonth.

Often production is fairlyyslack at the beginningof the month.(Often they are waiting for materials and parts.Near thelast 7 to 9 days of the month things speed up.This is a widespread situation.Especially in the machinery factory, they put on a big push after the 27thof the month or so.They would often work l2 hours a day if they were behindin the quota. If they work overtime, they were paid proportionately to theirregular hourly rate. But this only if the factory got permission to payovertime, then workers would later be entitled to compensation leave duringthe next month when they asked for it, equal to number of hours of overtimeworked. Workers usually did not refuse overtime, but could if they had agood reason in occasional individual cases.

If the group doesn't finish, the group leader has to explain why,but there is no punishment.

-6-Inspections

(7/30/80，3 hrs.)

At irregular intervals, all the quality inspectors of the small groupsmeet with the shop director and the technician which the technical departmentstations in the shop.When theyhadimportant quality problems in therepair shop,tthe group）leaderswouldattendalso.The technicians in theshop is under the orders of the department, and is there to helpotheshopdirector, mostly with quality problems.

In factories like machine building, they have a system where everyproduct must be inspected before they leave the factory, usually several

And they have specialized inspection personnel who are stationedtimes.in the shop.When they hold quality meetings, the shop director leads them,and the shop's technician, group leaders, and the groups

quality inspectorstake part.

If the problem cannot be solved, thentheynotifythechiefengineer or the technicaldepartment andask themn tohelpsolvetheproblem.

Most of the shop directors are familiar with most technicalproblems because they are promoted from among old skilled workers.1Earlierthey were usually grade 6,7,8, but more recently they have been promoted fromamong grades 3,4,and 5.TThe highest authortiy on technical matters was theplant engineer, in a middle-sized factory, and a chief engineer (zonggongchengshi)in a large scale factory.These are university graduateswith at least 20 years of experience or so, not always party members.But the special characteristic of China's system is that the technical systemhas a secondary status.The head of the technical department does rotalways have specialized training, and certainly his experience and gradeis not as high as the engineer, but he is always a party member.So hegets to lead a department, while the engineerc is like an advisor, with noreal leadership powers which are fixed.They can either listen to him or not

The directorsof the factory mostlyy were old skilled workersas they please.who had joined the party and been promoted over the years, while a smallerproportion were intellectuals who had joined the party after middle schooland had moved up in the party.

There is a contradiction between people who work inquality inspectionand on productin fulfillment.'The group leader and shopdirectortendtosay"oh, that's just a small thing.Forget it!" when a quality inspectionworker makes a suggestion.There is also a contradiction sometimes forthe same reason between the shop director and the head of the technicaldepartment.:So since they are of equal grades,they have to refer the disputeto the plant director to solve.TThe technician in charge of quality inspectionat the shop level is under the department's leadership, and he has no powerhimself.He too is only an 'advisor' to the shop director.Four Cleans Movement

They had it， but it was very short.The movement, according to whathe knows, started earlier in commercial and business organizations, and inlight industry and food processing.'This is because this is primarily a movementfor clean economics.This was Liu Shaoqi, Deng Xiaoping, and An Ziwen'spolicy. An was head of the organization department of the party.FButthese people did not bring up the issue of 'enemies'.The treated thecontradictionsuncoveredas'among the people'.

In the first stages of the movement, it was like the san fan (campaignof the l950s.1Mostly against corruption, and they treated things like'internal' contradictions among the people.But after a few months theychanged to the opinion that some economic problems could turn into political

This is the difference betweenproblems--a contradiction with the enemy.the early and 1ater 20 points.Deng Xiaoping was party secretary then,and Kang Sheng was probably drafting these policies.But if you read thesedocuments they are really theoretical and not very concrete. So Deng probably

-7-figured "how am I supposed to run this campaign?

There are no concretemeasures of problems here."

This is probably also what happened when thedocuments reached the units.

Their factory, around l965, had a work team come in which was cadresassigned by the bureau.These cadres were at the city district or cdepartment

They came to the plant and just held study meetings.Thesehead level.cadres may have previously worked in  the bureau, while some may have comefrom other factories.But all were assigned by the bureau.Theheadofthegroup was at the plant director level.

They had a meeting to introduce the 4 cleans policy, a mass meeting(jiaodai zhengce), after which they had small group discussions.The secondstage，they had meetings where members of the group went to talk with workersand cadres, asked them to confess and give self-examinations or reveal problemsof others. after which they would1getthosereportedontodoself-examinations.Most of the problems involved were economic ones.Therewerenocriticismmeetings or wall posters.

They did find two to three people with problems. The most seriouswas a man who engaged in corruption, skimming money off the canteen'soperations.He had sold1 grain ration tickets to workers.It totaled overl0oo¥. He was given three years of labor reform.

They were easy on himbecause he had a good attitude and confessed fully.

Another person was caught planning an escape to Hong Kong; and anotherwas a cadre in trouble for illicit sexual relations.They put the firstunder control (guanzhi） by the security department, while the second wasgiven internal party criticisms, and transfered to another factory where hecontinued as a shop director.

The influence of this movement was not great.Butthereweresomeinter-estingthingsshappening.For example, there was a grade 3 skilled worker whoworked in the tool storeroom.He had taken a tool and written"LongLiveKhrushchev!" on the wall of the factory. When this was discovered, andreported to the security department, they called an all-plant mass meetingimmediately.Theycdemanded that the person responsible confess.]If heconfessed that day， they would be lenient.If they caught him later, theywould be severe.So the next day the guy went to the securitydepartment toconfess.Sothe public security department sent three people over to investi-

They suspected that his attitude was that since KhrushcHev was forgate.material incentives and high bonuses, this man was protestingg hiswage leveland was dissatisfied. So upon investigation, they found that he had goodclass background, father was a worker, and he had no other problems, hadbeen active in criticism and political study, so they ended up being lenientand simply recording in his file the incident (jiguo).‘This punishment(jiguo) is between an oral warning and expulsion.-After three such writtenreprimands, you could be expelled.Since he hadconfessedfreelyand was ofgood class background, he was lucky. 1If he hadn't confessed or had a badchushen,, he would at least gotten 2 years of labor reform.CulturalRevolution

At the beginning of the cultural revolution, the city party committeepulled a number of cadres out of each bureau and transferedtootherstemporarily to be members of work teams.They shifted them out of theirold units because they didn't want the movement to be stalled by people tryingto save face （qingmian)for their friends.This was in 1966. The work teams,when they went to the factories, used the same basic measures as the fourcleans work teams, but the document they were working with specified thattheirobjectwass to uncover 'capitalist roaders within the party'.SSowhentheycame toplants theyy triedto get people to)reveallproblemsandbehaviorof cadres who were party members, but not worker partyI members.

-8-

They were looking at people'ss'party morals' (daode). They wanted tofind out if these cadres had said anything suspicious or done anything sus-picious in the past, for example saying that there were too many rightistslabelled in past campaigns.

Onthis account they also went after the workerparty members. IBut for the cadres, they also looked at personal morals.Whether they had violated any laws, whether they had illicit sexual relations,borrowed money but did not repay, whether they had encouraged favors orgifts from workers, taken special privileges for themselves.

Just like during the four cleans, they held meetings, investigated, andcollected materials and information on people.But the people in top positionswere able to protect themselves, even though in many areas their problemswere the greatest--in their currying of favor with the bureau level andother factory directors, in their use of repaired cars for their personalbusiness or for friends.But the middle and lower level cadres were theones who got attacked, mostly for minor things.So they got a few shopdirectors, department heads and staff members.The leading cadres wouldnot allow themselves to be cross-examined.

So they investigated people, had them write self-examinations.Therewere only about 5-6 people caught during this stage.An example:  there wasa man,the :vice-head of the materials department, who had entered the party someyears before after having reported seven years of education in his village.

Also he hada high incomeBut they found out he really had only five years.(l70¥), no dependents, so he really liked to live well, wear nice clothes.So they accused him of false reporting and rich lifestyle unbecoming aParty member.  He was given internal party discipline.

There were wallposters put up by activists amonggtheworkers.Theywrote wallposters criticizing the middle-level cadres based on materials

They were activists and young party members.given them by the work team.Thissituationlastedabouttwomonths.Thiswasduring the period whenMao left Peking and swam the Yangzi river, but he forgets the time of theyear exactly.?They did have criticism meetings after problems were uncovered,but these were within the small groups in the departments, and were not mass

They did also investigate worker partymeetings or struggle sessions.members who did not have leading positions,but they had never gotten around

But these middle and lower level cadres were all workersto criticizing them.

This gave rise to dissatisfactions in the next stagewho had been raised.and accusations that work teams had suppressed the working class.

(7/31/80, 3 hrs.)First Stage of the Cultural Revolution

The biggest problem with the work teams was that when they investi-

Also, eachgated party members theyy took no heed of your class background.work team had to come up with one or two people with political thoughtproblems, called1'sanfan fenzi'，tthree-anti elements.This meant anti-party, anti-socialism, and anti-Mao thought.This was just to show thatthey were doing their jobs.1These were not necessarily party memberswho were being caught.But whenyouaddtogether allthethousandsofunits in the city of Canton with a couple of such victims in each, you'retalking about over l0,0o0 people, many lower-level cadres, and many ordinarypeople among the masses, who weree labelled as having political problems.

So there were two directionsstaken by the work teams:1）iinvestigatingparty members (mostly cadres,'capitalist roaders within the party')， and2) investigating people of all sorts who had political problems, the'three anti elements'.

This second part of the task was to root out the 'new class enemies'

In his unit they were only preparing to implement the(xin jieji diren).

They were investigating things people said to friends, lookingsecond stage.

-9-at people's activities, asking friends to reveal things, getting people tomake small self-criticisms.Everyone was fearful during this period thatsomehow they might be caught in some sort of error.In his plant, rightbefore the work teams were withdrawn, they appeared to be zeroing in onthree ordinary workers for:'opposing socialism'.One of them, he remembers,had said some nasty things about his neighborhood committee small：groupleader who he had personal：problemswith.‘These were reported, and thenthey investigated his behavior in the plant and found that he sometimescame in late, left early, and broke things--a pattern that indicatedthat he really opposed socialism.They were investigating him very

In general, they investigated anything that might indicate thatclosely.you were 'dissatisfied with socialism'--work habits, speech, personalrelations, and lifestyle, anything.Second Stage of the Cultural Revolution

Mao returned to Peking and didn't like the way Liu Shaoqi had been'preparing the tea', even though he had been doing so according to longpracticed campaign methods from the sanfan,wufan, and anti-rightistcampaigns of both 1957 and 1959.So Mao demanded an immediate withdrawalof the work teams.

The work team suddenly left their factory.Then about 50 Red Guardsfrom middle schools came to the factory to participate in production andencourage workers to form their own mass organizations.7They werr spreadfairly evenly through the plant, and at their height there were about100 students there.

The earliest worker's organization to form were the "Worker's ScarletGuards" (gongren chiwei dui), and he thinks most of the early organizationsin factories at this time had this name.These people were mostly the acti-vist workers who were the'security workers',under the leadership of theplant security department, in the smallL groups.Theywereloyaltotheplant director.They were the leaders.Theydemanded that people had tohave a class background under the 'five red categories', and have been loyalactivists all along, very often also group study leaders, union group leaders.Since these were people who were loyal andunder the leadershipof theplantdirectorandthesecuritydepartment，tthey were under the informalleadership of the securitydepartment head, and listened to his opinions.They did not want to 'five black categories' to participate and disrupt things.

But later there was a directive from Mao which saidthat the objectwas not 'people in the party' (dangnei)）takingg the capitalist road,butt 'people in power in the party' (dangquan).When this happened, thepeople who had been suppressed earlier and prevented from organizing,began to form all kinds of mass organizations.

These people in the secondorganization ignored class background, claimedthat the object of struggle was leading cadres and not the masses.Thebasic difference between these two organizations was attitude toward thestatus quo (xianshi).The first group0 was satisfied, they were the activistsof twenty years standing.?The others were dissatisfied. The reaction of theauthorities to them was that their class backgrounds were bad, and thatthey were therefore counter-revolutionary organizations.TTherewereabout7-8 organizations of this second kind of faction in the plant.They hadmany names--worker rebels(gongren zaofan dui), and many others.They werehelped by the students in organizing.Theydid not organize according toshoplines, they were fairly spread out.?These were people who were earlier turneddown by the Scarlet Guards.At this earlyI stage, there were no party membersor Communist youth league members in these groups. As time went on, however,these kinds of people began to join, but this was in later stages of themovement.Most of the earlyJmembershadsomesortof historicalproblem

-10-or bad class background.

At this stage, there were still about l/3 of the people in the shops

But the amount uninvolved shrank as time went on,who did not participate.and the second group of newer organizations were not so choosy aboutmember's backgrounds, so they grew larger. The Scarlets became fairly passive(beidong)after the orders to go after thee 'people in power'.SSincetheywere conservative, how could they go after the leaders they had been loyalto?

The second group of organizations freely struggled the leaders fora number of months.They could struggle just about any leader theywanted.  SSo by this time most of the leaders either had 'stood aside'or simply didn't dare do any work.1Leaders at all levels didn't daretake responsibilities, didn't dare lead. They held a lot of meetingswith workers instead of giving orders.

Another problem which became important during this period was thatmaterials supply became very tight.AAlso labor disruption became very lax.Workers left early, came late, walked around in other shops smoking cigarettes

Things were really 'liberalized' (ziyou hua).and drinkingg tea.PLA Involvement in Canton

In the beginning of l967， the PLA dispatched "PLA support the leftgroups"(jiefang jun zhizuoxiaozu)tothefactories.Assoonastreyarrived, they announced that the Scarlets were the 'revolutionary' organi-zation.After this happened the PLA and the scarlet members started tohold struggle meetings against former leaders.But the struggle andcriticism they gave them was not as fierce as the other organizationsdid before. He thinks the Scarlets may have started holding struggle sessionstoconvince the PLA that they were really revolutionaries.

The PLA at the time was the only organization that Mao could rely on.They did not want to revive the party organization.So this was the secondtime that those satisfied with the status quo were in power. He says thatthis was the situation in Guangdong, and also in Hunan, Hubei, andSichuan.After the PLA group came, the more radical organizations retreated anddidn't dare oppose what was going on and became more inactive and passive.Also, a number of people dropped out of membership in these organizations,and more people began to join the scarlets.SSo the PLA, concerned aboutthe small size of the Scarlets, ordered them to'further develop' theirorganization and not be so strict about member's class backgrounds.TThePLA told them they would not let them seize power unless their membershipwass larger, a majority of workers.

In his factory, the PLA had not declared any of the organizations'counter-revolutionary', but in the city at large they had already declaredabout lo or so to be such, and had arrested some of their members. But inhis factory they just didn't support the other organization.But theyknewwhat was going on outside and they knew the PLA was not joking around,and were quite serious.

Under these conditions, the Scarlet organizations and those like them werewere supported by the PLA after March l967 were formed into a city-widefaction called'East Wind'(dongfeng).They said that the PLA's actions insupport of the left were correct, but others dissented and sympathisedwith those l0 organizations that were declared counter-revolutionary andbroken up.SSo they organized themselves into thee'Red Flag'ffaction.In Hunan, Fujian, and Guangxi during this period, the PLA opened fire on

They weregroups that opposed it, but this didd not happen in Guangdong.more civilized.

-11-

But theydid not solve the factional problem.There were stillfactions and many opposed the PLA, city-wide, although not in his plant.At this time the informant was a member of the Red Flag faction and hadbeen a member of the earlier organization in the plant before the PLA

He was a member of the 'Red Flag worker rebel group'.Their groupcame.supported the old plant director, and wanted him to be in the new leadinggroup, while the East Wind favored the old Party secretary.Thiswasthemost disorderly period in Canton, and after the two organizations6 formedand opposed one another in Canton and in his factory, they closed downproduction for about 2-3 months.This was in the summer of 1967.TTheydidn't go to work, all public buses were shut down.JPeople occupied keybuildings and there was armed struggle.

After this they shifted around the PLA teams, and theirs was removedand a new one came to the factory.This is because the faction problemhad become so large.When the PLA came their goal was to resolve thiscontradiction, conciliate the two factions,which Zhou Enlai had recentlydeclared as both revolutionary.  So the new policy was that both organizationswere revolutionary.

But another problem occurred during this period.@Guns were leakingout of the factory arms stores and into the hands of East Wind.So theRed Flag was making pellet guns from steel tubing. So an important questionbecame who would manage the arms stores.TThese were the kinds of problemsthe PLA faced in trying to restore production and reconcile the two factions.At this time they started the organization of the Revolutionary Committee.Revolutionary Committee

(8/1/80, 2 hrs.)

Through this entire period of disorder, basic-level organizations, likethe small groups with their leaders and group members, still existed andoperated on those days when people came to work.‘The political atmospherewas very strict, the security organs were still operating and sendingdown documents (like the '6 points on public security'--gongan liutiao,of l967), people had to continue to do theirr everyday work or else theymight be accused of being non-revolutionary.Actuallythe securitydepart-ment had been paralyzed, but the PLA group took up） its functions.Theyhandled the personnel files then. In reality, the people who have managementauthority1(guanli quanwei） in China are those who control the files.Thefiles for the plant-level leadership, shop directors, department heads andpartybranch secretaries are kept in the bureau offices.He realizes howgreat the power is of those who control the files because he was in controlof them for a period in the last stages of the CR, and everyone was extremelypolite to him then.

The PLA group organized groups, starting at the small group level,to discuss and nominate people for the revolutionary committee.Then theentire shop votes for the l6 or so, and chooses 4-5.These are secretballots.Then, in the six shops there are over 30 candidates, and theyhad another secret ballot to select l3. So there was a three-level electionprocess.At each step the candidates went through criticism and examinationsessions, where they gave self-criticism.The people gave self-examinationsorally and were cross-examined.  After that, they cast ballots.The ballotswere divided into sections.You had to vote for leading cadres, workers,ordinary cadres (staff) and also women's representatives.You have a choicewithin each category.

During the process the PLA tried to assure that there would be fairlyequal representation of the two factions, in order to reduce factionalismas an issue.They had the power to cancel the results of the elections ifthey were not properly representative, but they never had to exercise this

-12-power.The PLA did not sit on the committee.The committee only hadthese 13 members. AAfter the RC was formed, the PLA 'support the left'group left a few months later.The process went fairly1 smoothly in theirplant, and he thinks the elections were a success.They were one of thefirst factories to be able to form a revolutionary committee.This wasin the last half of 1967.1But factional feelings continued strong until1968.

The headofthe RCwastheformerplant director.The PLA groupsupported him because they found that the majority of the people ofthe plant supported him.There were three department-levelcadres:the former head of the finance department (a woman)， the former vice-headof the production department, and a shop)director.

There were twoordinary cadres, staffmembers from the materials and technology depart-

There were two0 vice-heads, both mass representatives.

One wasments.the informant, and the other was a former member of the East Wind.Theywere both workers and very active from early in the movement.Theyhad

There were four other mass representatives, all workersmadenomistakes.and participants in a faction.

The members who were elected from among the masses were those who wereespecially good at giving speeches, convincing people, and thinking wellon their feet.The twothat were chosen werethose inthe'masses

section

Also, those whogotthe least voteswerethosewho0 got the most votes.whoO were not very good at public speaking.

They also selected two mass representatives, one to be on the bureauRC, one on the city RC.They were both party members, both early activists,and both, like Kuai Dafu in Peking, had been labelled by the work teamsin the first stage of the cultural 1revolutin.They were opponents of thefirst PLA 'support the left'group and the East Wind faction.One of themhad been the technical department head,another a vice-head of the materialsdepartment.One of them had a father whoo was an official in the KMT inCanton--a workers' representative on the city committee.

The RC had not yet divided into core leading group and regularmembers--this would come a year later.The members still did their regularwork in the shops.At that time the bureau did not exercise very closesupervision over them, ttheir RC was still split and had not yet settleddown.This would take another year or so before they began to supervisethe factory.But in the meantime the RC organized itself for a series ofcampaigns.This was their main work for the ensuing period.‘The PLA wasstill there duringg the beginning of the period,they stood and watched thenew RC operate and wanted to make sure they handled well the work of rooting

: class enemies.They ran the 'cleaning of the class ranks' campaign,outthe'campaign of party consolidation and party building' (zhengdang jiandang),the'yida sanfan',and1 'dispersion in preparation for war'(zhanbei shusangongzuo)--thiss meant banishment of bad elements to the countryside, peoplewho were under the categories6 Specified by the '6 points on public security',and an 'anti May l6 elements'(campaign which was largely propaganda, but whichhad no real concrete effect on the unit.

After Lin Biao died in l97l, there were a series of movements torestore the administrative structure, transfer in new department heads anddirectors, and get mass representatives to hand over power to thesereturned cadres.This was when Deng came back to power again.Atthistime the mass representatives wanted very badlytoenterthePartyandhave their authorization (bianzhi) changed from worker to cadre.Aslongas they were not party members and still had a worker designation, theycould be sent back to their shopofloor toworkers jobs at anytime.This started around l972, and in some respects even in l97l.

-13-Campaigns and Investigations(8/2/80, 3 hrs.)

After the RC wasformedthe PLA support-the-left groupwas fairlypassive.At this time they still had not established the city revolutionarycommittee.In fact all the campaigns in their factory after the establish-ment of the plant RC were led by the Military Control Groupinthebureau(junguan hui). Power was held mainly by them at this time.Theyforwardeddocuments down to the plant, and approved all the reports of the RC ontheir activities, gave comments and orders.

The first order of business after the establishment of the RC wasthe cleaning of the class ranks campaign.

The first to be grabbed weresix people, ffour of whom were activists in the Red Flag, and two of whomwere people with historical problems--old1 'yundong yuann'(as he refers to them,the common slang term for habitual targets of movements and campaigns, itis a pun which means athlete).(One of them had a father who was in theKMT.(Of the four Red Flag activists, one was one of the 13 members of therevolutionary committee.

Why did they grab these six people? Because theleader of the factory's PLA group told them they were ordered by the PLAcontrol group in the bureau to choose six people.The PLA group in thefactory was the representative of the bureau.They had to listen to them,and the PLA group, under the influence of the East Wind faction, chosethese six people.

Five people from the revolutionary committee were members of thecampaign office.The members were the RC head, two vice-heads:（includingthe informant)， and two party members who0wereontheRC.They also formeda 'special investigation group' (zhuan'an zu), the only one in the plantsince it was a small plant, had 1l members.Then the group divided laboraccording to who was being investigated.The heads of the special inves-tigation group were the RC head and the informant, who was6 vice-head ofthe RC.But since the head of the RC did not have time to lead the group'sconrete work, and since he didn't want to, the informant was in chargeof the special investigation group's work.

They establisned a 'cowshed' during this period.

They had one oncebefore, ealier in the movement to keep'3-anti'(sanfan) elements, and itwas run1 by the security department.They investigated the cases of eachperson under suspicion, and sent people to all the places where thesepeople had grown up, and cross examined people about thisS person's behaviorand history.It was reallyIa headache and a lot of work.And they hadto pay the expenses of all these investigations, so it was expensive too.The whole process took l-2 months.After their investigation was completedthey filled out a long report on each person.While these investigationswentt on, these people were kept in the cowshed, wrote self-examinations,

Twoof these people werewere taken out for struggle-criticism sessions.older and were attacked largely for their class backgrounds, and the otherfour, members of the Red Flag, were accused of armed struggle, which theytied together with historical problems they investigated.

The special investigation group set the punishments and decided allthe cases.At the end, they couldn't come up with any real crimes.Sothey did not come to a conclusion in their cases, and just let them returnto work after two months as if nothing had happened.Except the one whowas a member of the RC, who was removed from that position.

There were another l0 people who were put in cowsheds and investigatedduring this period.Some pecple were declared counter-revolutionariesbecause they said that the PLA had decided to end the CR.This was declaredto be opposition to Mao's Thought.There were alsoanumberof people whohad just criticized the movement, wondering why so many people had been killed.

-14-(The informant estimates several hundred thousand in all China).'Theywereattackedforopposingthemovement.This whole process took aboutsix months.

How did theydecide to investigate people?

Usually oral reportsfrom the masses.People would report something someone had said or done,doubt would grow,than an investigation might start.Members of the EastWind faction often reported on Red Flag members.Also units from outsidewould report on people, ask about them (because their relatives also hadproblems, or someone had made a report on them), or simply the PLA leaderwould order the special investigation group to investigate someone.

The people who had bad class backgrounds (the five black categories)would be put under control of the special investigation group, meaningthat they had to report to them everyday.The others were declared'present day counter-revolutionaries' ((xianxing fan geming fenzi) if theydid not have bad class backgrounds.1None were sent to labor camps or putin jail at this point.But they all were put in a cowshed, struggled.Most of them were workers.Most of them were just released after a coupleof months, denied leadership positions, wrote self-examinations, butthere was no formal conclusion in their cases.1But allthe materialswritten down in the course of investigation had to be put in people'sfiles.This was the principle they worked on, and could not violate it.

Only two peopleeweregiven formal conclusions to cases.

Thry gave thema formal paper to sign, said they had uncovered major errors, put theconfession in the file.Most were told that they couldn't find any bigmistakes, only small mistakes, so they were told they were being released.But the third category was the worst, because they didn't come to any

But theyconclusion at all, tthey just did not come to a conclusion.didn't say whether or not the person had a problem.They just let him go.

Basically speaking, those who were attacked in this campaign werepeople that the PLA group were dissatisfied with, whose biaoxian in theCR they were not pleased with.Then they went after bad class backgroundsand other mistakes.If the PLA groupwasSpleased with your biaoxian,then they would not investigate you.

This was just part of their work, their main point of concentration(zhongdian）.Theyaalso had a general investigation (pucha).All the fileson every worker in the plant were gone over by people in the special inves-

They looked at a)family background, b) personal classtigation group.designation, c)political history, d)work history, and e)history of otherfamily members.Theywerelookingtoseeiftherewereanydoubtsabout

in the years accounted for in the file?the person.Were there any gaps

Before the cleaning of the class ranks campaign was completed, theyhad already began the campaign of 'party consolidation and building' (zhengdang jian dang).This new movement meant that attention would be turnedtowards party members in the course of these investigations.They immediatelyfocused on five people, had them halt work and work on self-examinations.One was a leading cadre who had been criticized in the four cleans movement.One had said things which were critical of the PLA. At that time it wasillegal to criticize PLA people except to their faces.1If you said some-thing outside the presence of the PLA, this was called'spreading rumors''resisting the PLA',&and was against the law, a crime.Two others hadbuilt their own arms for use in armed struggle.(One was the former headof the security department.

They didn't put these people in a cowshed, they still had the freedomto leave the plant. But a lot of the workers wanted the old securitydepartment head put in a cell, because he had suppressed1 workers so much

They put up a lot of wallposters at this time demanding this.before the CR.

-15-But since the informant was fairly moderate, he was able to convince theothers that you shouldn't just throw everybody in a cell.

This former securitydepartment head was very grateful to the informant,and only six months later he was transfered by the bureau to be securitydepartment head of the Canton tram company.HHe thanked the informant andmade a sworn brotherhood (yiqi X 气  )statement to helpo him out in the futureif he needed it later on. Security departments are very powerful. LWangHongwen had been vice head of his factory's security department before theCR.After being demobilized from the army he had been a worker, and laterwas promoted to. this work even though he still had a worker's designation(bianzhi).(Of course he was a party member.

These people hadn't broken any laws.They were given no punishments,but they wrote self-examinations.They did not really engage in any concreteparty building, this was largely an ideological campaign.

But atthistimethey were beginning to rebuild basic-level party1 organizations--the branchesin the shops.

At this time the informant was still a member of the 'campaign office'of the plant RC. There were three party members, and two non-party membersor 'mass representatives', of which he was one.FBut when they started theyida Sanfan movement in l969 he thought of a way to get out of the leadership.By this time the special investigation grouphad grown to over 20 people，andtherewereseveraldemobilizedsoldierswhorecentlyhadbeenassignedtothe plant and were on the group,leadinggthe yida sanfan.

The infoimantstarted to write a long document on the 'criticism, struggle, transformation'which was a plann to carry out this movement in the plant.Itcontainedahistory1 of the plant, the recent class struggless in the plant, the currentstage andd how to implement the process of 'struggle, criticism, transformation'

This included plans for reforming and building up shop(dou, pi, gai).leadership and various inspection systems.Other people were taking upactive leadership of the investigations and campaigns.Thedocument explainedhow to apply the Anshan charter and the content of various editorials, strengthenthe dictatorship of the proletariat, get rid of bureaucratism, unite the masses,

For example, theyin view of the specialLconditionsoftheirownfactory.sent down the power of ordering spare parts from the shop director to thegroup leaders. They would no longer require shop director permission forthis.They set about in this way to cut through red tape and simplify regu-lations.

But·they never really implemented any of these reorganization measures.Soon after he left the RC, the personnel of the RC underwent a big change,includingg the head of the RC who was transfered.lBut you have to be clear,the main reason these kinds of reforms were not really implemented wasthat these were secondary issues.The key ones were politics and power.With personnel being transfered and people moving up and down, trying tohelp0 their friends and help out one another, these kinds of proposals wereoftenforgotten.

(8/4/80, 2 hrs.)

At this time the PLA support-the-left group appointeda number ofdemobilized soldiers to the special investigation group）(about half themembership)， and also some leading cadres from other factories who hadbeen attacked in their original units and lost power.They did this becausethese people had no factional ties and they had just come from elsewhere.All of these people who participated in the special investigation groupwere full-time investigators, no longer participated in production.

Theyused a lot of people for this, more than a department's worth before the

Every problem that arose meant two people had to becultural revolution.assigned to investigate.

-16-

They established a Mao Thought Study Group (xuexi ban) for the 'yidasanfan'movement, in which about 50 people participated who had a varietyof problems.

They studied and wrote self-criticisms, ate and slept inthe factory, and were not allowed to return home at night.They werenot controlled as strictly as people under investigation during thecleaning of the class ranks--no one was watchingg them 24 hours a day,and they were not forbidden totalk to others or write things down onpaper.(Of these 50 people,tthree were middle-level cadres, four were partymembers, and the rest were masses, or non-party workers.

This 'yida sanfan'wass'strike out against a handful of counter-revolutionaries who sabotaged the socialistrevolution' aand'opposecorruption, speculation, and extravagance'.

The people who were attackedin the movement were anyone about whom any doubtt occured, either in reports,conversations, or behavior. It did happen that people who simply did notlisten to leaders were attacked.All that was necessary was for a doubtto be raised, and there would be an investigation.

Therewasnocleardocument specifying and analyzing the direction of their workinthemovement.Three people attempted suicide in this movement, and two of them died.All were workers, one was a woman.

The most serious punishment to come outofthecampaign wasa man whowas givennthe labelof counter-revolutionary.His father had been a military official in the KMT who had executed communistsbefore 1949, and he was accused of consorting with young people of badclass backgrounds who opposed Mao's thought.He was also caught with aportrait of Mao which had been defaced.HHe was put on probation and kept inthe factory (liuchang chakan).1Twoof those who committed suicide were a manand woman who were accusedof having assexual affair.The man had a landlordfather, and the woman was a widow.Sothey were struggledagainst in thismovement. The woman couldn't stand it: and killed herself.

Theemanwasso upset he killed himself a couple of days later.

Finally, theyyhadanAnti Mayl6 Elementscampaign whichwasmainly

Als0,study because they didn't have any of these people in their unit.there was a campaign to 'disperse the population in preparation for warin l969, where they sent people who had been given labels during the campaigndown to agricultural villages.Evolution of the Revolutionary Committee

The committee changed after the yidan sanfan campaign.

There wereseveral reasons why.First, a lot of people on the RC asked to be sentback to their original work units and return to their worker status.RCmembers were not ever given cadre status, nor were they supposed to befull-tim administrators and office workers.But they had meetings every dayand for a long time they did not participate in their manual work.

Another factor was thatthere wasalot oftransfer of people whohad

Some were transfered out,been cadres since before the cultural revolution.new ones transfered in.1Intheir plant theysentintwonewvice-headsofthe RC, so thee mass representative vice-heads were not really needed in

So gradually they stopped doingtheofficeallthetimeafterthat.work and returned to their original production groups.

Another factor was that some workers in leading positions were transfered

And in otherr cases, members of the RC were given formalto other factories.

(Only one person like this, descr-punishments and stripped of RC membership.

Finally, workers could be appointed1later to be new members ofibed above).the RC.  SSo there was a gradual change.By 1976, according to his friendsletters, there were only four mass representatives left of the original l2elected duringtheCR.They had all since joined the party.(Ofcoursethere

-17-were other mass representatives, but these had been appointed since thattime by the new leaders.?There had been no elections since the original oneduring the cultural revolution.Rebuilding the PartyOrganization

The party organization began to be restored in l969.AAround 1971,shortly before the death of Lin Biao, the PLA support-the-left group leftthe plant.lBut they remained in the bureau for a while, and eventually thehead of the bureau PLA control committee became the first party secretaryof the bureau.

They started with elections in the shops, by a show of hands, of a listofpeoplewhoformerlyy were leading party cadres at the shop level, anda list of activists prepared by thee top leadership.

They voted on theseprepared lists by a show of hands.Most of the people in the branchcommittees were people who had been full time cadres before the culturalrevolution.Workers, people without administrative cadre standing, couldnot be elected to branch secretary positions.But there were two non-partyactivists who were elected to the branch committee from this list, andthey were admitted into the party within a week.‘There were a number ofsuch activists approved by the leadership at this time who were able toenter the party.Thereweretwoolderpartycadres intheshopover 55who retired at that time.

Later, they restored the party committee for the entire plant.'Theleading group of the plant prepared a list of candidates for party committeeand sent down to the shops for discussions.Through this period offermentation (yunniang), they sent this list down for comments and revisedit again about three times, then came up with a final list of candidates.Finally, they held an election.But it was hard in this process to discussand evaluate the top leading cadres in the party because their files wereall held in the bureau and you don't know their history. At this end, theyheld an all-plant meeting where they had an election.Theleader oftheplant readout the names onthefinallist andone at atime askedfor ashow of hands,'yes'andd'no' on each person.At this point these werepeople who had been selected by the top leadership and were top partycadres in the factory.Few daredoppose the list of candidates at thatpoint.Of the 20 candidates, ll were elected.This was 1970 or 197l, beforeLin Biao died.Also, the bureau assigned and transfered Party Committeemembers in and out between plants at this time.Their plant party committeehad about ll members in all, 5 on the standing committee.

re-established, and Deng

After Lin Biao died, the Party committeeXiaoping back in power, they started to return people with cadre designationsback to leading positions in the plant and departments.  There was a big

These old cadres began to run thingstransfer ofcadresbetweenunits.and the mass representatives stopped occupying leading positions. Theydid not understand these top management questions. All cadres were returnedto their office jobs unless they had violated the law.They did not get ridof the mass representatives, they did not lose their positions. It justhappened gradually that the old cadres assumed more and more responsibilityand more leading work.TThey just had a lot of 'vice-heads', but among thevice-heads, the ones who were party members with high cadre grades werethose that began to take on power and handle most leading work.

-18-

描述：

