id: eaa873101b
标题：Hong Kong Interviews: Informant No. 47
日期：1980-5-28
是否是时间段：false
作者：Andrew G. Walder
来源：
标签：文章
书籍：Hong Kong Interviews: Informant No. 47
书籍作者：Andrew G. Walder

正文：
INFORMANTNO.47

PERSONALDATAAge:36

Sex:Male

University graduate (Chinese language and literature)Education:Total Years Relevant Experience:

6Last Year of Relevant Experience: l975

Year Left China:  11979Initial Immigration Status: LegalNative Place/Overseas Connections:

unknownClass Background/Political Designation:

unknown

OCCUPATIONALHISTORYSUMMARYPositions Held: l) Copy clerk, Plant office, Electric Motor Factory,

Fujian, 1970-75Administrative Level of Work Unit/(No. of employees);

1） County/(l00)Experience in Full-time Manual Labor (for non-worker occupations:

none mentioned

TOTAL HOURS: 2.5APPOINTMENTS:1

PAGES TEXT:

3No.47Occupational History(5/28/80, 2.5 hrs.)

The informant studied Chinese language and literature at a university.studyingfor 5 years andgraduatingin l968.He studiedChinese classicsfor the first 3 years, then went to modern Chinese literature and foreignliterature.Among the foreign authors he remembers studying were Balzac,Mark Twain, and Turgenev.PAfter graduation, because of the cultural revol-ution, he was sent dow to a commune for one year of labor tempering (duanlian).He did this for a year, during which he became the commune scribe(wenshu),copying orders and documents.Then he was transfered to a county levelreportinggroup）(baodaozu)，whichdiddservicework for thelocalpartycommittee.They collected information about agricultural production, theimplementation of policies, model factories, communes, workers, and peasants.

In l970 he was transfered to a factory and worked there until l975.This was an electrical machinery factory administered at the county level.It had 80+ workers, and around lo0 employees in all. They were under thecounty industrial bureau.They made water pumps and small motors for tractorsand trucks, these were electrical motors. He worked as a copy clerk in theplant office.

In l975 he was transfered to a county upper middle school where hetaught Chinese until he came to Hong Kong legally in l979, April.1Hisworkexperience was in Fujian province.WagesandEmployment

During his two years in the commune and the press office he got 45.5¥,which was the trial period wage for university graduates.  In l970, he wasfinally raised to grade 2l administrative cadre, 55.5¥, because they hadn't gottenaroundtoitduringtheCR.They delayed the automatic promotion for thetrial employees.After this, there were no raises.There were no wage read-justments from 1970-75 in the factory.There were no bonuses.Theydidhavesupplementary wages for those who moved in from different wage regions.

They had temporary and contract workers who came from both the communesand from residents' committees in the towns.Contract laborers often stayed onfor years and were finally put onto the permanent wage bill when the plantreceived permission to enlarge the permanent workforce.Contract workerswere hired because they could not get bureau permission to hire more perma-nentworkers.The contract laborers and temporary laborers could both comefrom either city or countryside. Contract workers got 3o￥ a month, and gotsome of their medical expenses paid for, and free medicine.

Temporary workersdidnotgetthesebenefits.Plant Structure and Mangement

The plant had an office, in which he worked. He was a copy clerk.Therewas a secretary to the plant party secretary who handled internal party work.There was a party secretary, who was the head of the revolutionary committee,who was the top leader in the factory.?There was one vice-secretary who wasa vice-head of the revolutionary committee, and one vice head of the RC whowas not a party secretary.

There was also a statistician and a cashier in theoffice.This was the plant headquarters.

Belowthere were about 3-4 workshops of various sizes.Thelargesthadover 40 employees, the smallest about 6.The big shops were not divided intosmall groups .But therewasaninformalaccomodationwhereevery6machinesin an area, including their operators--say 3 masters and 3 apprentices--would

-1-have one among them who was reliable, had goodI guanxi with the shop director.You could call him a group leader，because he served as a conduit of theshop directors orders to the workers.These same people were also responsiblefor arranging group study.

They were usually party members but if a groupdidn't have party members, they wouldd certainly appoint someone who wasa youth league member or an activist.

The shops had a director, and two vice-director.One handled politics,the other technology.Theshopcdirector was also the branch party secretary.

The revolutionary committee had 8-9 members, most of whom were partymembers.   The party secretary was the head, and also acted as plant director.There were 3-4 shop) directors on the RC. One of the vice-directors of theRC was a vice-partysecretary.Another vice-head was an old experiencedmanager who was vice plant director before the CR. There were 2 mass rep-resentatives--one was an old worker, another was an activist who wasa female.She has since come to Hong Kong.

In fact, the party secretary ran everything.TThe old vice plant directorhad an office, but no power (youzhi wuquan).

The was what was known as thepolicy, "the party leads everything" (dang lingdao yiqie), and "unifiedleadership" (yiyuanhua lingdao).

There was also a party committee.Theparty committee specialized in worker's political thought, and politicalcampaigns.And the RC handled production.But in reality. the RC was underthe leadership of the Party Committee, because thee party led everything.The RC was not the same level of leadership as the party committee, theywere not equal in power.The RC was under party committee orders.  rherewere also a few administrative 'groups' (zu).FHeremembersthetechnical(jishu) group, the logistics (houqin) group, and the storage (baoguan) group.Campaigns

When they had political campaigns,the top ordered the party committeeto hold x amount of meetings, and write up Y amount of reports, and theycomplied.The 'cleaning of the class ranks' campaign near the end of the CRwas just like the campaigns Stalin ran in the Soviet Union in the l930s and1940s to 'clean out anti-Soviet class enemies'.They killed a lot of peoplein the USSR then.They didn't kill many in China, but he feels that thecampaign was even more severe than the soviet one because they seized,investigated, struggled, and imprisoned so many people. Given China's largepopulation you could probably say this movement was more severe than theSoviet one.Chinarepresentssan'expansionof thesuppressionofcounter-revolutionaries' (sufan kuoda hua).

This movement was run while he was still in college.When he was inthe factory, the most outstanding campaign was the criticism of Lin Biaoand Confucius campaign in 1974, and the criticism of water margin in 1975.They met in the evenings to study usually, but during these campaigns theyoften stopped production to hold mass meetings, put up wallposters, go to acriticism rally.In those days the leaders didn't need permission to stopproduction.The biggest problem in production during that period was that itwasn't planned very well.

They often had to stop production to wait formaterials.Social Relations

Workers often didn't come to work then.Social relations were very

Workers didn't mind each other, and cadre's didn't manage the workers.complex.Work activism was lacking.  Several reasons for this.  People's livingstandards were getting lower, and it was hard to buy commodities.Wageswere fixed, and did not vary by attendance, or by how hard you worked.

-2-The other half of it was that there were poor relations between cadres andmasses. The political campaigns and accusations which often turned out tobe false made people hold anger in their stomachs toward cadres. If theyhave anger in their stomachs, they won't work hard. Also, leading cadreswere afraid to handle production too well， they didn't dare grasp it toofirmly.They stuck to politics because it was safer.If they were afraidto grasp production, they were just as unwilling to urge the workers towork hard and come in on time.

Factions--there were none in name. But they still had remnent feelings.rhis had an affect on people's mutual relations.?This would set up barriersbetween people. The affect his had on things in the factory was that wheneveran important matter came up, these informal (wuxingde) groups would gettogether and come up with different opinions.If a political campaign cameup they would go after one another， criticize others for their politicalthought.

They did criticize people during the LinBiao-Confucius campaign, fortheir thinking.They did during every campaign in the early l970s. Ifthey didn't how could the party secretaries report a success? TThey usuallywould criticize people for things they said to their friends, their life-styles, their attitudes. At these times "suspicions turned into crimes"-=it was enough just to be accused or suspected. So under these conditions itwas easy for these two factions to go at one another. In fact, none of thesepeople ever had any real problems. In many cases, the only reason there wassuspicion about their present thinking was because they had made mistakes inthe l950s or at other times. These criticisms varied in their seriousness.Least serious was in the small groups, to make a self-criticism. Most seriouswas the all-plant mass criticism meeting, and the organization of specialinvestigation groups.These movements would end without any real conclusion.They would crificize, investigate, but never tell the people involved whetheror not in reality they did have a problem. His plant was relatively good,they only did this to one or two people during the campaign to criticizeLin Biao and Confucius.

-3-

描述：

