id: df6f0b1ba7
标题：Hong Kong Interviews: Informant No. 21
日期：1980-3-30,1980-4-3
是否是时间段：false
作者：Andrew G. Walder
来源：
标签：文章
书籍：Hong Kong Interviews: Informant No. 21
书籍作者：Andrew G. Walder

正文：
INFORMANT NO. 21

PERSONALDATAAge:48

Sex:MaleEducation:

Normal college graduateTotal Years Relevant Experience:

6Last Year of Relevant Experience: l972

Year Left China: 1979Initial Immigration Status:LegalNative Place/Overseas Connections:

Canton native/wife OS ChineseClass Background/Political Designation:professional (father Univ. Prof.)

OCCUPATIONAL HISTORY SUMMARYPositions Held: 1) Low-ranking officer in PLA

2) Electrician, Electric Cell Factory, Canton, 1958-603)University student, 1960-644）Teacher, middle school, 1964-705）Electrician, Sugar Factory, Shunde County, Guangdong,

1970-72

6) Teacher, middle school, 1972-79Administrative Level of Work Unit/(No. of employees):

2) probably Municipal/(2000)

5) County/(lo0 slack season, 4o0 busy season)APPOINTMENTS: 2

TOTAL HOURS:4

PAGES TEXT:

5No. 21Occupational History (3/30/80, 2.25 hrs.)

The informant had a long a complex career in China. From the mid-l950she was a low-ranking officer in the PLA.In l958 he was demobilized andsent to work as an electrician in an electric battery factory in Canton.He worked here from 1958-60.  In l960, he was admitted to a university,where he studied from l960-64.After graduation, he taught at a middleschool until l970. Then he was sent down to work as an electrician onceagain from 1970-72 at a sugar factory in Shunde County, Guangdong.Thesugarfactorywasundercountyadministration, while the electricalbattery factory was under municipal administration.  He taught once againin the middle school until l979, when he emigrated to Hong Kong legally.Wages

He was a demobilized soldier in l958. There are two ways of leavingthe army for officers, as in his case. First, you can be demobilized(fuyuan); second, you can 'change specialties' (zhuanye). In the secondcategory, the officer is found work outside which fits with his armyspecialty.These people are often sent to Xinjiang, Mongolia, or otherfaraway places to accept higher offices.  They are usually paid the sameor a little less.  If you are 'demobilized', you are given a year's pay,and not found a job.1If you come from the countryside, you must returnto the countryside.If you came from the city. they introduce you to a factorywhere you start from the bottom.

Since he studied radio technology in the army, he had experience inthe electric cell field. When he started in the electric cell factoryinCanton he was given a grade 2 worker status, since he earlier had someexperience. The wage was 4l.

There was no wage readjustment while he was in this factory from l958-60.But there were raises on an individual basis.?There were no tests for this.Usually the raise was based on a mix of 3 factors: work technical level,years of experience, relations and impression of each individual in theeyes of the leadership.TThis includes political showing (biaoxian), whichin this period included not telling the truth about the Great Leap Forwardand saying that it was a success.

Later, when he worked in a factory once again during l97l-72, there wereno readjustments or individual raises of any sort.  He remembers that therewere wage readjustments in 1963 and in 1978, but he was not working inindustry during these times.  During his second period of employment,becausehe was a sent-down teacher, he was paid according to his teaching salary.Bonuses

In 1958-60 they had a bonus--once--a special one at the end of 1958.They separated bonuses into three grades--30¥, 25¥, and 20¥. rhe reasonfor this was because during the year workers had been very tired becausethey worked day and night on steel production.In l970-72 they did nothave anyfixed bonus system either.TemporaryandContract Labor

During the Great Leap, they increased the number of workers greatly,and among them were both temporary and contract workers.Temporary workersgot less labor insurance and sick leave. The labor department organizedthe introduction, while in the countryside, the commune arranges the intro-duction.But many temporary workers work for lo-20 years and are only tempo-

The difference in wages for temporary workers is not toorary in name.

-1-great from regular workers. 1It depends on what they do.1Most temporaryworkers did work of low technical level, like moving, sweeping the floors,hard physical labor.

The best temporary workers could be changed to permanent workers whenthe factory was allowed to enlarge the workforce.The biggest differenceis in the type of work and in labor insurance, not in wages.In Shunde,the temporary jlabor system was arranged by1the communes.They had bothtemporary and contract workers, but mostlytemporary.The sugar factorywas very seasonal work, so the temporaries were called 'seasonal workers'(jijie gong）.These commune seasonal workers turned over the majorityof their wages to the commune.There are two kinds of temporaries;peasants who come from production brigades, and residentsS（jumin）whocome from thetown(zhen) government, and are not under the jurisdictionof the communes.The peasant's grain comes from their communes, while theresident's grain rations come from the town government.Electric Cell Factory, 1958-60

The electric cell factory in Canton had about 2ooo workers.1Electriciansmainly did machine repair work, but during the Great Leap he was transferedto a shop which had begun producing radios as a new product for the GLF.The great leap was an extremely disorganized affair.They pushed for anincrease of output, the production of new products, like radios.They didn'thave the personnel to start up a new production shop, and they didn't havethe technical level or machinery to produce radios.They established thisnew shop and produced radios for about a half year and then gave up.iTheydidn't have the expertise to produce these things.There was an engineerin the plant who had previously been 1abe1led a rightist in 1957.In 1958-59when they asked him if he could handle radio production, he didn't dare sayno, so he said he could and he would.EButreallyhecouldn'tsolaterhewas defeated.

Also, they lacked crucial spare partssandmaterials.They had peopledoing jobs they were not trained for.

TheyTaalso established a new productsdepartment which was in charge of designing and arranging for the productionof radio parts. They could buy equipment and other things needed.Buttheydidn't have concrete technical knowledge about processing, forging temperatures,etc.

Normally the supplies department handled the supply of materials

Supplies:and parts.  BBut during the great leap forward this changed.The amount ofparts and materials, and variety needed increased greatly during the GLF,and supply departments couldn't get them through their normal channels.

Butsince everyonee increased their output at one leap, there was a big shartagein lots of key materials--like the silver and zinc needed to produce radios.Also hydrochloric acid.  There was just none to be had through normal channels.So since the unified distribution system was of no use, each shop and depart-ment was given the job of procuring their owm.?These units went through theparty committee offices, and the responsibilities of the party increasedgreatly.1 Previously onlyythe supplydepartmentsarranged and approvedprocurement and expenditures, but now the party committee offices had to

Also, since procurement no longer was done by theapprove all of this.supply department, each unit--the production shop or new products department--had their own procurement personnel, either one or 22 people.Thismeansthatany staff member might be sent out to get materials, and there were nospecialists for this purpose.

Also, production time was increased, and there was almost alwaysovertime, and sometimes they went for days without sleep.This started aroundJune of 1958, and lasted until September or October l958, and then they started

-2-getting orders from above to produce X amounts of steel every month.The actual implementation of this was really laughable.They grabbed anypiece of spare iron, pulled off window frames, pots， door knobs.They hada blower, coal, etc.But although they did a lot of refining of iron,none of this was really steel.But they called it steel.It did not really

During this period, when building the furnace,meet standards for steel.smelting iron, and lookinggfor spare iron, they often worked three daysat a stretch without sleep.

Industrial accidents increased greatly.Absolutely no precautionsfor safety, and no safety equipment was installed on the furnace.BPeople weretired, and worked fast.1Also，theyhadalot of cadresfrom theofficeswho were sent down to the shops who weren't accustomed to this kind of work.So there were a lot of accidents.They did this for 2-3 months.TThereasonsfor stopping with the steel was the same as the reason for starting--ordersfrom above.

After this, they gradually discovered problem after problem, despitethe initial obvious ones.For example,there were quality problems, and noone wanted to buy their products. The newly opened shops in the factoriesclosed dowm, and plants returned to their original products.Bit by bit,

The realization of defeat inthegreat leapnormal production was restored.was slow in coming because they would read in the paper a false report oran exaggerated one, and lots ofsuccesses in other plants.So for a whilethey still thought the great leap was a success, and that it was possibledespite the problems they experienced themselves.Everyone was exaggeratingand falsifying, and this made things worse.

(4/3/80, 1.75 hrs.)Organization of battery plantzI was an electrician, and worked in

(weixiu zu). There were also turnerss(che gong)andthe repair

groupmachinists (jixie gong) in his group. There were five of them in all,and one was the group leader.?Their job was to repair machinery, equipment,in the plant. If a problem popped up. someone from the concerned shop wouldcome and ask their services.They wereundertheleadership of theproduction department (shengchang ke).The group was not dispersedduringthe GLF, it was just that he personally was sent to a shop as a transfer.Xiafang of Cadres during the Great Leap

The proportion of cadres going down depended on political climate(zhengzhi (qihou). when the party committee raises slogans, and promisesthe upper levels to send x% to the front lines of production, they willship up a movement to send comparatively more dowm.  The more the partysecretary sends dowm, the better he was judged by the upper levels.Butalso they would sent down 20 and bring back 7 after a short period, butstill report that they had sent dowm 20.

Why did they send dow so many cadres?There reallyweretoomanystaff people for the little work that they had to do.Theyhad4-5 peopledoing only office work--calling on the phone, making reports, adding togethera few numbers.

So when you send down a large number it doesn't always influencethe ability to complete the work in the departments.Cadres really didn'talways work that hard.This is a universal problem in China.

Wages areguaranteed bythe state, so there is no incentive.

Cadres were sent to some of the less arduous shops.1Leading cadresinthe departments tended to be sent down to do basic level leadership work--to help shop directors, and vice-directors.This was also the case forpeople from the partycommittee.Regular staff members tended to be sentdown. to do manual labor, but always in less dirty, less arduous shops.

-3

The length of time varied, this was usually only for a few months,but some labored for over a year.This was for full-time labor.Some ofthe cadres from the higher levels had wives who worked in staff jobs, andthey tended to be sent to easier kinds of labor.Some of this refersto municipal and provincial level cadres, who were also sent down intofactories.This was on a larger scale than the internalxiafang ofdepartment people in factories. A larger % of these people from bureauswere sent dowm because they were non-production organs and could do withoutpersonnel, and there was more waste up there.The people in the factorydepartments were usually quite busy, so they couldn't be sent down in suchlarge numbers.

Many of theee cadres sent dowm from state organs were like 'guests',and had no real ability or interest in this kind of labor.TThe workers andthe local cadres ignored these types, they were useless.· But the cadres frominside the plant knew more about production andperformed better becausethey would have to face these people later.

So they tended to work better.Also the cadres sent dowm from above tended to form into their own groups,were separate from others, and were not too interested in production. Theyacted like 'guests' (keren). Of course there were exceptions, but most ofthem were like this.Xiafang of Powers during the Great Leap

You can look at some of the increased responsibilities of the lowerlevels as xiafang of powers, but there is also an aspect to it of having thehigher levels decide.Like the example of supply procurement mentionedin the previous interview.  Different shops searched for their owm materialswhich the supply department could not get, but also everything had to bearranged and approved by the party committee, a level higher than thedepartment. :So power was also transferred upward as well as downward.

Worker participation in management--he does not remember this asbeing a Great Leap policy. It was emphasized more in the culturalrevolution.1But he's not too sure about this.

His impression of theGreat Leap was that it was a production drive, and this was emphasized.It was during the CR that theyemphasized the problems of management,who held power, not during the Great Leap so much.

He does not remember worker 'yuan'being selected in the small

But he is not entirely clear thatgrouptohelp with management jobs.his experience was typical on this, since he did not work in a productiongroup but in a repair group.lBut he adds that his impression is in partso unclear because this was such a chaotic period and it is really hardto say what was going on in the groups.Shunde County Sugar Factory

The factory had 4oo workers during the busy season, and loo duringthe slack season.  The revolutionary committee had already been establishedwhen he arrived in l970.?The members of the RC were the military deputy;who was the head, a cadre from the county industrial bureau, who wasthe vice-head, 3 former leading cadres, including the previous plant directorand one man who had been transfered in after the CR, and 3 mass representa-tives.All of these people were party members.?The chairman of the RCwas also the party secretary--the party committee had already been rebuilt.

In actuality, the Military Representative did not really1 manage any-thing.He had the most power but he didn't do any concrete work.The othersdivided up responsibility for the various departments.Some ran labor andwages, some supplies, some technology.  They met often, and had a large

4number of meetings.Not all of these meetings had to do with production.Lots of them were for disseminating documents of the ninth party congress, etc.When he left the plant in l972 the PLA deputy was still there.

He was in the plant as part of the xiafang of teachers from Cantonmiddle schools to do labor in rural areas. Also, a worker propaganda teamwent to his school. This time, it was he who was a 'guest' just like theothers they didn't like in his factory during the GLF.He was givenelectrician's work to do. He had no fixed responsibility, just did workas he was inclined. All his documents, wages, records, and connectionswere still at his old middle school.

Generally speaking, the Party Secretary was the one-man leader ofthe plant.He held all the power. In form, it was the party committee,but the secretary was the real boss, and everyone went out of their wayto be nice to him and agree with him.SeasonalWorkers

Since work was so seasonal in nature, they hired a lot of temporaryworkers.There were two sources， the town (zhen) and the commune peasants.These people were quite happy to get these jobs.  They were consideredpretty good.Monthly wage was over 30 per month.  The peasants had to givea portion of their wages (about 6o%） back to the production brigade.But they still really increased their income by l0-20? per month apiece.But peasants lost work points unless they paid money to the brigade.  Butthis was not 'buying out' of the brigade, since the brigade arranged thisemployment. This was a right given by the brigede.

But wnen a brigade member was able tofind work as a casual laborer(san gong), one of either two things happened. First, the brigade wouldrefuse to let him go. Or second, the brigade would allow him to go if hepaid X amount of money into the brigade coffers.rhis was a sort of'raeket!".' (qiao zhu gang). But this was different from the temporarylabor system arranged by relations between factory, resident's committees,andcommunes.The plant's busy season was for 3 months, and began inNovember.

-5-

描述：

