id: a659156809
标题：Hong Kong Interviews: Informant No. 22
日期：1980-3-22,1980-4-6
是否是时间段：false
作者：Andrew G. Walder
来源：
标签：文章
书籍：Hong Kong Interviews: Informant No. 22
书籍作者：Andrew G. Walder

正文：
INFORMANT NO. 22PERSONALDATA

Sex:  MaleAge: 35Education:Industrial College graduate

12Total Years Relevant Experience:Last Year of Relevant Experience: 1980

Year Left China:  1980Initial Immigration Status:1Legal

Canton native/brothers in Hong KongNative Place/overseas Connections:Class Background/Political Designation:

unknown

OCCUPATIONAL HISTORY SUMMARY

1) Technician, Technical Department, AgriculturalPositions Held:

Machinery Repair Plant, Hainan Island, 1969-80Administrative Level of Work Unit/(No. of employees):

1) County/(200)Experience in Full-time Manual Labor (for non-worker occupations):

two years in countryside, l966-68, before job assignment,

Taishan dyke project under PLA; one year shop labor, l969APPOINTMENTS:  2

TOTALHOURS：4

PAGES TEXT:

6No.22Occupational History

(3/22/80, 2.5 hrs.)

He worked in an agricultural machinery repair plant, which had 200staff and workers.  Its products were spare parts for tractors, alsotransmissions.They also repaired tractor transmissions and did otherrepairs.This factory was run by the agricultural machinery bureaufor the county.This was on Hainan Island (Guangdong), and he startedwork here after 5 years of university and two years of manual labor inand around Canton.Hewassent: to Hainan in 1969, and worked at thisfactory until he left, legally, for Hong Kong in l980, February.

He worked in a technical section (gu), which is equivalent toa department (ke) in a larger plant, but they call them gu in a smallplant.Their job was to examine incoming agricultural machines--generaters,trucks, tractors--and find out what is wrong.They draw up diagrams forthe spare parts needed.Then they would send the diagrams to the partsshop for the production of these parts.Afterwards they sent to theassembly shop for repairs.

Some of the parts were in the plant warehouse, but many were not,so they had to process them themselves.They had many different kinds ofmachines--tractors from Rumania, Hungary, Russia, and several makes fromChina.The plants were supposed to be self-reliant and complete (wan neng)when it came to the production and supply of parts.

After graduating from South China Industrial College.in l967, he wassent down to do 2 years of manual labor in a labor brigade under the PLA,and did work building dykes in Taishan County, to keep out the sea.1After this,in l969, he was sent to Hainan, where he was assigned to this factory. Hedid one year of manual labor in the shops, and then was assigned to thetechnical section.

Thereafter he was never sent to do manual labor.Wages

When he first came to the factory, he did manual labor and was apracticing technicain (jianxi) for one year. After one year, accordingto regulations, he was turned (zhuanzheng) into a grade l3 technician.The first year his wages were 57¥, and after he became a regular technicianhe was raised to 68.75¥.This did not change until he left in l980, buthe says he would almost certainly have gotten a raise duringl98o if hehad stayed, and would have gotten 8o￥ or so.

There were two wage readjustments during his experience.(One was in1978, and another began near the endof 1979. In 1978, they had two read-justments.(One was very small, for just a few people, and then there wasa larger one for about 40% of the people.Then in 1979, they proceeded toraise another 40% of the people.In both, the criteria were in part seniority,work contribution, technical level.  People were raised l grade, which wasworth about l0¥.

They had many arguments in small groups when they assessed for raises.The small groups assessed, drew up name lists.The shop would pare off namesto make sure they didn't give too many raises.Then the final list was givento the party branch committee to discuss.They drew1 up a final list andposted it on the wall.

They can cross names off the list and add new onesnot on the list of nominations from the shop floor.TThen workers can

raise opinions about the nominees, and if there are many objections expressedIthen they will send the names back to the small group for discussion.

Almost every small.group had serious arguments about these raiseassessments.When people all were af about the same level and there was only

-1-a fixed number of raises to be given out, there were often arguments.People would get embarrassed (mianhong erchi)， and then argue aboutthe assessments if they were unsuccessful. Sometimes friends split upover this, and would not talk thereafter.There were also some problemswith bias in selections, and often it was based on personal friendships.

This was an experimental plant when it came to wage readjustments.In l978 they saw that there were many problems developing, that dissatis-factions and splits were resulting from the assessments, so they announcedthat there would be another assessment later in a year or two. Now theyare studying ways of changing the selection process to avoid these kindsof problems.Bonuses

They began in l977. They had monthly, quarterly, and yearly bonuses,and also bonuses for overfulfilling targets (chao e jiang).The bonusesfor each month were divided into 3 grades， usually about 4¥, 6￥， and 8¥,but:theyfluctuated basedon the profit/loss situationof theenterprise.Forc the year end bonus6(nianzhong jiang), grade l was about 30¥, grade 2about25¥，andgrade3was20¥.About 40% of the people in the plant do notget any bonuses at any given time.These are the people who come to worklate, spoil spare parts, etc. They also had a quantity bonus which wassomewhere between the amount of money for the year-end and monthly bonus.

The method for assessing for the monthly bonus was through small groupmeetings.

They would raise opinions, draw up lists of names.

Justlikefor raises.They used a lot of time':in these meetings.The time formerlyallocated for political study is now being used for these bonus assessments.Now there is never more than l political study meeting a week， if thatmany.Most of the meetings now are production-related meetings.

They also have a piece rate 'bonus' for overfulfilling targets.If an individual overfulfills his quota, then they will give back to theworker a fixed percentage of the profit on each overfulfilled piece, asan'overfulfillment of quota bonus'(chao e jiang).]If they lost money,then there is no bonus.:If profit increases or decreases, the bonuswill increase or decrease accordingly.

Before l977 they had 'supplementary wages' (fujia gongzi), and nowthey no longer have them.Every person got about 5¥ per month, regardless.There were no differences in the amounts given individuals，and the amountremained the same month after month, year after year.1Bonuses have nowtaken the place of these payments.

Before l977there was a lot of dissatisfaction due to the wage problem.This influenced people's work, and they didn't want to work real hard."Mo yang gong" (磨 :羊工), this is a universal type of condition in Chinesefactories.The meaning of this term originated during the contract laborsystem (bao gong ) of pre-liberation times.

Whenever the gang boss (gongtou)was not there, workers would loaf on the job.

Workers also asked for a lot of sick leave so they could stay at homeand clean, buy things, make furniture.This was a very serious problem.But in the past year this has changed greatly.

Thingshave gotten almostcompletelyY better, but of course there are still problems.1For example, someyounger workers, when there is nothing to do will loaf. Generally the youngworkers don't work hard, and aren't really interested in bonuses, have noreal skills, and their education is not very good, they don't need tosupport a family. so they are pretty lazy.

There is also a big problemcaused bytthe children of higher cadres who come to work there.

They don'tlisten to orders, and are lazy because they know they are cadres' children.This is still a fairly serious problem.

-2-

Generally speaking, the formerly serious problems with work stylehave changed for the better.]People's incomes are directly connected toprofitability. and individual performance, so they want to work hard.Also the problem of false sick leave has been greatly reduced, andthey practically don't have that problem at all anymore.TemporaryandContract Workers

They always had this system.There was a navy airbase nearby.They would hire people in the households (jia shu ren)--children orwives--of the military personnel.They signed contracts to work for a fixedperiod of time.  At certain times, when the local labor bureau apprevedan addition to the labor force, they would come from among these temporaryworkers. They were paid about 30+ per month.

They usually did casting work in the metallugy shop.They usuallyhad about 20 of these kinds of temporary workers, or about lo% of the totallabor force.  IBefore the temporary workers did not work any harder thanthe other workers. Now they are eligible for bonuses and piece rates justlike the others, and their work has improved too.

There is a remaining problem with the bonus system which is tiedto output, especially the new piece rate bonus. It is ok for workers toincrease their output, but they still have supply problems, and still runout of parts and materials. So when they run out, there is nothing theycan do, and activism at work is of no use.Thisisaremainingcontradictionin the new bonus system.Democratic Elections

In l979 they began democratic elections for leaders at two levels.They elected shop directors (chejian zhuren), shift supervisors (banzhang)if the shop was divided into shifts, and the production group leaders.Nominations:  the leading cadres in the plant brought out their list ofnominees at an enlarged meeting of all enterprise employees.Theplantleaders would nominate more than one person for each shop director's

Some of the old shop directors were not qualified for theirposition.jobs.It was not unusual for anincumbent shopdirector not to be nominatedby the leadership.

After the enlarged plant meeting, the factory split up into shops,and had meetings in allL the shops to discuss and nominate further.Thebranch party committees and the plant office had the power to disqualifynominees, but in his plant they were hesitant to use this power, becauseit would make workers unhappy.

They did not use this power in his plant

but he hears that in other plants (through reading newspapers) that thisd

was a problem elsewhere--cadres cancelled the election results. But thisnever happened in his plant.

Elections: they elected an 'election committee' composed of commonworkers, who were elected at these shop meetings.Then they had secretballots.They collected the ballots, and the members of the electioncommittee would count them up right in front of the workers, on a blackboard.Then the results were sent to the plant director's office for approval.There were no cases of them changing election results.They had a numberof incumbent shopdirectors who were nominees but wholost the elections--there were four shops in all.

All the newly-elected shop directorwere middle aged workers or above.They were people who had good relations with the masses, and who had their

They elected five people in all at the shop level， in each shop.respect.One shop director, l vice-director, and one group leader for each small group.

-3-

The whole process took an intensive week of effort.There were severalpreparatory meetings, one every day after work. Both in small groups, todiscuss the elections and their significance, and in the larger shop meetingsto discuss and nominate individuals. The branch party committee, aside fromraising some nominees and approving the final list, had no special role.Originally all the shop directors were party members.PAfter the elections,the percentage of leaders who were party members was reduced.He says thatthere were plans in his plant within the three year period of readjustment(l979-8l) to develop these elections further to the level of the plantdirector. Many plant directors were upset about this, and feel that theirabilities were not great enough, and feel like their days are numbered,and were counting the time until they were replaced.

These election results were to be valid for one year, after which theywould elect again.1If the incumbent had done a good job, he could be re-elected. When they were preparing for elections, they studied an articleabout an enterprise in Yugoslavia--a big trust which combined agricultureand industry--which was published in l977 in People's Daily. He says thatthey studied the Yugoslav experience with elections. He says that nowChina is leaninggtowards the Yugoslav experience, and they are very muchinterested in it.

(4/6/80, 1.5 hrs.)

His impression while they studied the Yugoslav experience was that theyeventually planned to take this road all the way.This meant establishingelected workers' councils by secret ballot, and having them take the functionsof the party committee in supervising the Plant Directors.The party wouldthen handle only internal party personnel matters and the workers' councilwould supervise the plant director's management of production.

Soinsteadofhaving a system of "unified leadership0 of the plant director under theparty committee", it will be under the direction of the workers' council.They have not implemented this yet, and still haven't even elected the plantdirector, although there are preparations currently under way to do this.But he says he belives that the workers' councils will come before too long.This will require the partycommittees to relax their hold.In fact， thenewspapers still insist the Party must exercize unified leadership, but in factthe relaxation has already begun.Many non-party members, and old workers.are being elected to positions like shop director.Class Labels

In l979, in relation with the relaxation of party leadership, they gotrid of the pre-l949 class labels and took all bad material related to thatoutofthee files (dang'an).Their class designation (chengfen) would bechanged to their present occupation.This was the case for landlords, richpeasants, capitalists, traitors, spies, rightists, etc. All these labelsare gone.So there is no more discrimination of this sort in promotions,school admissions for children.The old system of 3o years has been basicallydone away with.The Agricultural Machinery Repair Plant,1970-80

He started working there in March l970.At that time they had alreadyestablished a revolutionary committee.The old plant director and partysecretary had been sent to agricultural villages.  A new party branchsecretaryand plant director had already been transfered in.

For a short period during the cultural revolution, a rebel leaderhad been selected as the head of the Party Committee, but later on he wasreplaced by the new Party Branch Secretary.

He had originally been a regular-4-worker, but after the new party secretary came he was sent to be a shop director.During the elections after the Gang of 4 fell he was defeated in the electionand is now an ordinary worker. "Careerist" (yexin jia)--this is the term heuses to refer to this fellow who was a former rebel leader, who had ambitionsto be a leader and climb up over the backs of others. These people werefairly common duringthatera.

There were 5-6 members of the revolutionary committee, which was finallyabolished in l978. The head of the RC was the party secretary, the vice-headwas the plant director of pre-CR days, and there were 2 leaders from themass organizations, and a couple of shop directors.

He volunteers that the revolutionary committee form was no good. why?Because they were never elected, they were just people who had been mostactive in struggling and knocking down others.  Also these people had noabilities to manage production.Finally, their power was quite concentratedin their hands, and they didn't have to listen to worker suggestions. Soworkers did not like it.

The main problem was that politics was first, and production second.All these new workers in positions of leadership, without experience, andsome of them 'careerists', grasped mostly politics, meetings, criticism,and campaigns.They didn't manage production too well.

They were'campaignexperts'(yundongzzhuanjia).

Who handied production? In name, the revolutionary committee, but theyreally didn't understand the production process.  So they would continuallyraise the slogan "grasp revolution, promote production", but they didn'treally know how to promote production effectively.1Production during thisperiod naturally was not good.TThe plant lost money during at least partof every year, and drew on state funds.?They ate out of the same rice bowl(chidaguo fan) .

A good-sized group of activists were prometed to leading positions in

The old cadres were mostly at the May7cadreschools.departments and shops.They left around l970, and had not returned until l975. Their talents werewasted.When they finally came back to the plant, they did not demotethe activists, the new cadres. So if the old leading cadre came back, hewould just increase the overall number of leaders. "rhere were more peoplethan work"(ren fuyu shi)--the number of leaders multiplied beyond the worktherewasforthemtodo.

This gave rise to another problem.There was a contradiction betweenthe new and old leaders.They didn't agree on a lot of matters，so a lot ofproblems could not be solved because the different generations of leaderscould not agree or cooperate.The basic problem was that leaders could notbe demoted.  Amongg these different groups of leaders, there remained a lotof mutual personal hostility (siren de chouhen). This is a problem whichremains right up to the present.Administrative Structures

The departmental (gu)structure underwent no basic change as a resultof the cultural revolution.They still had departments, but they wereled by the revolutionary committee.  They always raised the slogan of"simplifying administration", but this was just talk.  As time went on,

the departments got fatter and fatter.！

In the production groups, there were no worker 'yuan' to carry out

small group management, and they did not establish this system until l977-79.：But there were technicians, quality control yuan, and materials yuan for each3.shop of 40-60 workers.The small groups had a fixed system of before and

after-shift meetings, production meetings, and several other activities.But these meetings were only restored after l977.During the earlier period

-5-they had fallen into disuse, and nobody bothered with them.Before theGang fell, the group leader just gave orders, and sometimes the workerslistened, sometimes they didn't.After the Gang of Four

After the Gang fell, they did not drag out and criticize anybody.They did not want to repeat the Gang of 4's own method. This did happen

at the upper levels of the party and government, though, but in their.: plant they just had meetings' to criticize the gang of 4.

They have not completely abolished political study, although they: no longer have a fixed system of political study every Thursday, as they:: used to. Now when an important document is released, they will hold ameeting to read it. But other than that, meetings are strictly for，business. Before the Gang of 4 fell, they had political study at leastfour evenings a week.During the high tides of campaigns, they had

five nights a week plus one hour on Sundays. For the criticism of.Deng Xiaoping in l976, for example, they met seven days a week, and

these meetings went on until llpm.1Many people just slept and chatted.

During the period before l976, it was not uncommon to stop production::l during some periods to study criticisms of Lin Biao and Confucius, studyI the theory of the dictatorship of the proletariat, etc.

(Generally speaking, the informant is quite impressed with the Yugoslavmodel as it has been presented to him within China, and he refers to itrepeatedly and compares China's method with this democratic model.)Impressions of Workin Hong Kong

The informant has found his first job in Hong Kong since the firstinterview--a factory job in a watch factory in Kwai Chung.  We startedthis interview with his impressions gathered during his first 2 weeks ofwork, and with comparisons to China.The biggest difference in work isthat work is divided very finely for a small plant, as compared with thesmall plants in China (the plant in Hong Kong is Japanese, Seiko). Workis very monotonous here (dandiao).Workers only do one thing all day long,and are not masters of the house.They can't make any suggestions, thereare no discussion meetings. Also the work pace is much more tense (jinzhang).Headmitsthat he had a great deal of trouble getting accustomed to itat first.

-6-

描述：

