id: c8d08891f9
标题：Hong Kong Interviews: Informant No. 48
日期：1980-5-28,1980-5-29
是否是时间段：false
作者：Andrew G. Walder
来源：
标签：文章
书籍：Hong Kong Interviews: Informant No. 48
书籍作者：Andrew G. Walder

正文：
INFORMANT NO.48PERSONAL DATA

Sex:MaleAge:43

Industrial college graduate (machinery)Education:

12Total Years Relevant Experience:

Year Left China:  1979Last Year of Relevant Experience: 1979Initial Immigration Status:Legal

unknownNative Place/Overseas Connections:Class Background/Political Designation:

worker

OCCUPATIONAL HISTORY SUMMARYPositions Held: l) Technician, Production Department, Tractor Building

and Repair Plant, Guangdong, 1968-79Administrative Level of Work Unit/(No. of employees):

1) County/ (200)Experience in Full-time Manual Labor (for non-worker occupations):

fitter for 8 mos. in l968 as part of labor temperingAPPOINTMENTS:2

PAGES TEXT:TOTAL HOURS:

4

5No.48Occupational History (5/28/80, 2 hrs.)

The informant studied in the machinery department of an industrialcollege for 5 years, where he learned both the theory and operations ofdesigning and building machinery.

The prpose of his training was to trainpeople who could themselves repair, make drawings, and lead technical work.He graduated in September l967, and awaited his job assignment at hisuniversity for several months, during which time he played a lot of basketball,saw a lot of movies.He was 30 at the time.

Before going to college he worked for a period after primary school,when he was an apprentice in a printing shop for about 6 months in the l950s.Then he returned to middle school and eventually to college.So he had aworker class background, and was fairly lucky as a result in college admissionsand job assignments.

In early l968, he was assigned to a Tractor Building and Repair Factory

The factory was run by the county indus-in a county seat in rural Guangdong.trial bureau.It had over 2o0 employees, and was fairly large for a county-level enterprise in Guangdong.

When he first went there, he was a fitter(qiangong) for a while, in order to familiarize himself with the productionprocess.It also had the function of having him work together with theworkers, explain to workers the diagrams if they had any questions.Hedidthis for about 7-8 months.Then he was transfered to the Production Grcuip(shengchan zu), an administrative department.1His job was to make drawingsfor spare parts and distribute them to various shops, and help them incarrying out the tooling if they weren't sure how to do it.

1976 they

The production group enlarged over the years, and finallychanged the name to 'section' (gu). The production section was divided into4 parts--products, equipment, quality, repair and maintenance. There wasalso worker training. He was in the products section and also was involvedin training work, teaching technical education courses for workers. He didthis right up until he came to Hong Kong legally in l979.Wages

When he first graduated from college, he was given a grade 22 adminis-trative cadre scale, 45￥.Why notassigned a technical cadre scale? He doesnot know, since some were assigned to technical grades.

They just didn'tpay that close attention, maybe it was an administrative error.Anyway,his pay was the same as a grade l3 technical cadre, except he was about5¥ lower.He doesn't know what the lowest grades are for technical oradministrative cadres.

After a one year trial period, he was made regular (zhuanzheng), andraised to 54¥, but still had the same assigned scale.EBasically this is anautomatic raise for all except those who have made political mistakes. Hewas not given a raise right up until he came to Hong Kong in January l979.

In l973, they had a wage readjustment for low grade workers who hadlow incomes, like those who were still. grade one--but only workers.In1978, there was a wage readjustment according to work contribution, whetheryour work was good or bad.They also considered length of service, theirpolitical behavior, personal life, like illicit sexual relations. .They hadassessment meetings at various levels--small groups, shifts, shops, general

and finally closed-door decisions by themeetings for the entire plant,leading group) in the plant. At each step they discussed, pulled out afew names from the nominees.They met four days a week after work for several

-1-weeks to discuss, assess, nominate people for raises.  of course peoplehad arguments over differences of opinion and over reasons given for oppo-sition to individuals. This was natural. But this was not a major problem.The highest wage in the plant was a grade 7 worker whose wages were 7o+.He was an old, experienced worker.Bonuses

They always assessed for year-end bonuses from l968 onwards.Theylooked at political performance, birth planning, attendance and leaves, unitywith coworkers, and work performance, personal life, etc.They assessedin the groups, and sent names upward for approval.?They divided workersinto three grades.(Only about l% did not get bonuses.The rest were dividedinto 3 grades--20¥, l5¥, and l0¥.They included considerations ofone's personal life in :the discussions--whether or not you get along withyour coworkers, whether you have had illicit sexual relations.  Sometimesthey had two bonuses per year, with one coming at the middle of the year,but this was not common, and it was not connected with the plant's profita-bility. The plant usually lost money anyway.They all saia that in theplant--the plant leaders told him this.But they never had monthly bonusesright up until the time he left. The plant received supplemental fundsfrom the state every year.TThey did have a bonus for overfulfilling quotasfor about one month in l974, but it was junked after that because theysaid material encouragements were no good.Discipline

Work activism was about average, not really good, not really bad.But work efficiency was low because they often had to stop work and wait formaterials.?This was a constant problem.  They had to wait for theirpurchasing agents (caigou yuan) to get whatever they needed before theycould continue.

For poor work or misbehavior, the first step is to criticize in thesmall group. If the person doesn't reform, they will criticize at progres-sively larger meetings--shift, shop,all-plant.  If this still doesn't work,then they will give a warning (jinggao). This means that the leaders talkto you and tell you not to do this anymore.?The last resort is expulsion.But the managers need permission from above levels to do this.

Nobody was fired for any reason while he was in the plant. But theydid have criticism of one person at the all-plant level for stealing things.He tried to sell materials to another plant and got reported. Generallyspeaking, they don't punish people, but give them education.TemporaryandContractworkers

They had both kinds of workers in his plant. Temporary workers werepaid and hired by the day.  Contract laborers were longer-term, and paid bythemonth.They had temporary laborers from l968 when he came to the plant,but during the wage.readjustment of l973 they turned all temporary workersintopermanent ones.But in l976 they started using contract labor.

The temporary workers were assigned by the cities, while contractworkers came from the countryside. 1Most temporary workers were paid thesame wages as regular workers, and they had grades just the same as perma-nent workers which were assigned them by the labor bureau.Theyweremostlygrade l， and some went up to grade 3.while they worked they got the samefringe benefits as regular workers, but could be terminated at any time, alongwith the benefits.

-2-

The contract workers came from agricultural villages.They were paidgrade l wages， 29¥, but there was a breaking in period of l8¥ for a while.They did not sign contracts, there was no fixed period. You could be termi-nated at any time, but some have been workinggtherefor yearsand are stillthere. There's not much difference in the two systems except: in where workerscome from and return to.Temporary workers could stay in the city afterwards.Contract workers had to return to the village when they were done with work.Cultural Revolution (5/29/80, 2 hrs.)

When he first came to the plant the cultural revolution was stillgoing on.Production was just average， not too bad， not too good.Thebiggest problem was to get materials because sometimes they had to stop towait on materials, while they sent several purchasing agents (caigou yuan)out to look for goods.

The two factions had already been united when he arrived.They werestill investigating the cases of suspected capitalist roaders. One cadrehad stood aside, the top man--the branch party secretary.Theyyhadalreadyestablished the revolutionary committee, it had 7 members. The head was aformer vice branch party secretary who had been appointed by officialsabove.One vice-head of the RC was another of the previous vice branchsecretaries.  A worker was the other RC head. There were four othermembers, and they were all shop directors. In his plant, shop directorswere considered workers, thus worker representatives.

The members were picked at mass meetings.  They were nominated by thetop people in the plant, then they listened to the masses'opinions onthese nominations.Then the upper levels had to approve.In reality, theysimply picked the people who got along well with the top leaders--the partysecretary was still in power.

They did have 'army representatives', and their power was considerable.They had directed the establishment of the revolutionary committee.

They also had two people, ordinary cadres who were relatively old, whowere doing manual labor because they had participated in the KMT before liber-ation.  These two, plus the old party secretary, were struggled repeatedly andlater sent to do manual labor.All other cadres participated in manuallabor for a while, but were not struggled.

When they 'struggled' somebody, they had a large meeting where theyshouted accusations at the person on a stage.  If they refused to admitthese accusations were true, then they would be shouted at by everyone atthe meeting.

They had a 'cowshed' at the beginning, but had alreadyabolished it by the time he got there. The dorms were very close and theydidn't need them. rhese people were not beaten.They did stay in these'cowsheds' for a brief period earlier.These two were finally rehabilitatedin l973, but not until after they had, along with the former party branchsecretary, been to the May 7 cadre school in the countryside for about 2years.After l973, the 2 were sent back to ordinary cadre work. The formerparty secretary was rehabilitated in l973 and in 1975 was promoted to beassistantbureauhead.

The PLA representatives did not leave until l977, but they did not havemuch real power after 1973 or s0.They just did investigation work. Theyhad a 'cleaning of the class ranks' campaign.This was Lin Biao's idea.They investigated people with historical problems--landlords,traitors, etc.Then they sent them back to their home villages. They had this campaign, studiedthe documents, etc.but such a small plant at the county level did not havemany of these kinds of class enemies. So no one was attacked. The county

-3-bureau knew the history of all the cadres--they didn't need to investigate.They also had an "anti May l6 elements" campaign. But this too was juststudy. How could there be people connected with Peking in such a small plantin a small county seat in Guangdong?The1970s

By l970, the problems with production had largely returned to normal.The biggest problem was waiting for materials. Workers stopped work towait for materials at least once a week.It was very common for a shop tohalt production to wait for materials to arrive.This is because the statewould give them X amount in targets, but not provide them with sufficientmaterials to meet the target. SSo the purchasing agent had to travel aroundlooking for the neededumaterials.The most common practice was trading oneproduct for another.1Money was not often used because people were alwayssearchingforsomethingg for their own plant, so they used trades.Thispractice is widespread.

They had a campaign to criticize Lin Biao and Confucius, and to criticizeDeng.

They had study meetings, read the documents, but never attacked orcriticized anybody within the plant.

They had these meetings every day afterwork for 2 hours, except for Sunday, Saturday. and Wednesday.They just dida pro-forma job.Why would they want to criticize Deng??They liked him.Butif they didn't criticize him, and didn't speak up, they would themselves becriticized. So they just gave formalistic criticism, and didn't really believewhat they were saying.They would mouth slogans they read in the newspapers;or would copy the newspaper documents when it came time to compose an essay.

When the Gang of Four fell, there were no changes in the leading cadres.They criticized the Gang of 4, of course, they had no choice, just likebefore.But there were no real followers of the Gang of 4 in theircounty seat--the leaders in their unit just listened to order from above.Theydid not criticize for very long, however, or very busily.Also after early1977 the amount of political study declined. By l978 they still met everyday after work, except Sunday. Saturday, Wednesday.FBut the amount of timewas reduced to l5 minutes or so.Also they spent more time on productionmatters, and they began to hold technical study sessions for all workers,oneevery week, for an hour and a half or so.Before the Gang of 4 fell therewas no technical study, they didn't dare talk about it.:So the 'stinkingintellectuals', the technicians like me, began to teach these classes.Plant Organization

During the post-CR period the leading group was the RC, but in l978they abolished it, and changed to the plant director system.TThe abovelevels appointed the head of the RC, the branch secretary, to also be thenew plant director.The above levels also sent in a new vice-directorfrom another plant.

Thentheyseparatedtheparty!and administrativeorganizations.

When he first started work in the production group）in1969，thegroup had only about 3 people, all the other cadres were (doing manual labor.By the time he left there were 8.They divided up labor amongthem (see theintroductory section).He worked in the products section, and sent downdiagrams and processing cards to the shops. After work was finished, thefilled out cards were returned to him. Most of the written reports werehandled by the planning section (gu), and by the statisticians. Aside fromdrawingg these technical diagrams, he also went to the shops to make sure theworkersknewhowtoreadthemandproducetheparts.

-4-

Of course they had the 'three-in-one' (sanjiehe)， but this wasnothing special.when he went down to the shop to make sure his diagramswere understood and carreid out, wasn't this an example of the triplecombination?He met withleadingcadres at the lower levelsand withworkers.

They never had a workers' congress, even most recently, and the unionhad no real power right up until he left.They were talking about revivingunion functions when he left, but these things take a while to actuallycarry out. They never had elections for shop directors or group leaders.These people are appointed from above.Factions

AftertheCR，ofcoursetheyhadremnantsofoldfactions.Itmeantthat there was gangqing among those who were on the same side earlier, butthe relations between people on different sides were not so close. But thiswas not a political problem. And the problem was not a serious one, sincetheir towm was just a small one.

一5一

描述：

