id: ca2e6db1ad
标题：Hong Kong Interviews: Informant No. 39
日期：1980-5-12
是否是时间段：false
作者：Andrew G. Walder
来源：
标签：文章
书籍：Hong Kong Interviews: Informant No. 39
书籍作者：Andrew G. Walder

正文：
INFORMANT NO.39

PERSONALDATAAge:28

Sex:MaleEducation: lower middle school graduateTotal Years Relevant Experience:

9Last Year of Relevant Experience: l977

Year Left China:1977Initial Immigration Status:probably illegal

Shantou native/os ties unknownNative Place/Overseas Connections:

unknownClass Background/Political Designation:

OCCUPATIONAL HISTORY SUMMARYPositions Held: l) Worker, production group leader, Auto Parts Collective,

1969-77Administrative Level of Work Unit/(No. of employees):

1) Street, collective/(20-200, growth over years)APPOINTMENTS:1

TOTAL HOURS: 1.5

PAGES TEXT:

2No.39Occupational History (5/l2/80, 1.5 hrs.)

He graduated from middle school in Shantou at the age of l6, in l968.He was ordered to the countryside but didn't go, and stayed in the cityto look for work.The street committee didn't help him, so he looked forwork himself.In l969, he found a job in a street committee-run collectivewhich had 20 people when he first started, and over 2oo when he left inl977. They produced parts for automobiles and for electric motors.Whenhe first started he was an ordinary worker for one year, then because hegot along well with his peers and had technical ability he was made aproduction group leader.The Collective Factory

They were not supplied with any spare parts or raw materials by thestate.Their head manager, or yewu yuan went out and concluded contractsforthepurchaseandsaleofgoods.This was done completely independently.The manager had been the leader from the beginning, and he had been the onewho had applied to the street committee for collective status.He wasthe manager for the entire period he worked in this plant.

Directly under the manager were the group leaders (banzhang), whichis the position the informant held.  There was also an official assigned bythe street committee, called a 'group leader' (zuzhang)who handled relationswith the street and also who did all the political work--meetings, etc.

Themanager handled both production and business. TThe workers were usuallyintroduced by friends already working there. No other way existed in mostcases to get a job there.Wages

In the beginning, there was no fixed grade system, just assigned wagesbased on technical ability. The lowest wage at that time was a worker whogot 26¥, which is what the informant got at first. The highest wage wasthe manager's--he got 6o¥. Later, they changed to a fixed grade system,with four grades in all:  l) 24-26¥（putonggong），2）30+¥，3）40+¥，4）50¥.There were no fixed supplements every month, but you could apply for ahardship supplement.They did have a small bonus system for overfulfillingquotas of about 4% of the wage after around l972. The quotas were set at theproduction group level, and if the group overfulfiiled the quota, the bonuseswould be distributed equally to all the workers.

If a worker worked poorly, they would first talk to him, then if hedidn't improve they would hold a meeting, bring up his name and criticizehim.  There were very few people fired for bad work. Only one person inhis group was fired during:the entire period.If a worker didn't come towork, they would take away that day's wage. All the workers were permanent.They did have technicians come in to help on temporary assignments frombig plants, but they didn't draw wages from the plant.Production Group Leader

The group leaders were responsible for receiving the month's taskfrom the manager, and then for planning and arranging production. But therelationship was fairly loose.They would hold some meetings, and themanager would tell the group leader when he was handling things poorly;when the products were not good, but generally the production operationswere the group leader's responsibility.

The group leaders worked just like ordinary workers. But they were

-1-responsible for making work assignments, instructing workers on how to dothings, deciding what to produce on what day. There were no meetings inthe groups, but did have all-plant meetings which were led by the manager.

There were no assigned helpers within the group but the leaders didget help from certain workers whose technical ability and judgment he couldrely on.  He would ask questions of them and get advice.

There were no factional problems of any sort. The biggest problemin the plant was obtaining materials, especially steel. This was the toughestthing.  Sometimes they couldn't get materials and they had to stop workfor a while.During and after the CR there was no real disruption, nogreat effect on workers thinking or action. This is because if they didn'twork they didn't get paid, and if the plant closed, it was hard to findworkagain.

-2-

描述：

