id: 4ae5a633f5
标题：Hong Kong Interviews: Informant No. 69
日期：1980-8-8
是否是时间段：false
作者：Andrew G. Walder
来源：
标签：文章
书籍：Hong Kong Interviews: Informant No. 69
书籍作者：Andrew G. Walder

正文：
INFORMANT NO. 69

PERSONALDATAAge:  51

Sex: MaleEducation: 2 years primary school, some cadre schoolTotal Years Releyant Experience:5Last Year of Relevant Experience: 1962

Year Left China: 1962Initial Immigration Status: IllegalNative Place/overseas Connections:Guangdong native/os tiesunknownClass Background/Political Designation: Poor/Lower-Middle Peasant, 1957

rightist

OCCUPATIONAL HISTORY SUMMARYPositions Held: l) County-level Administrative Cadre, Bao-an, Guangdong,

1951-572）Labor Reform Camp, Bolo County, Guangdong, 1957-583）Canton Machine Tools Factory, 1958-62

a) Worker-prisoner, Production group leader, 1958-60

b) Skilled worker, Metalworking shop, 1960-62Administrative Level of Work Unit/(No. of employees):

3）unknown/(@1000)

TOTAL HOURS: 3

PAGES TEXT:

2APPOINTMENTS:1No.69Occupational History(8/8/80, 3 hrs.)

The informant is a native of Bao-an county, on the border withHong Kong.At the time of liberation he was a poor and lower middlepeasant who participated in land reform actively, and was selected in l95lby the Party because of his good class background to work in the financialdepartment of the new county government.The finance department did all kindsof economic work, including commercial work, marketing and assurance ofsupplies of production materials.He was a leading cadre at thedepartment (ke) level,and worked at both the countyI and the district(qu) level in this area of Guangdong.7The Party also sent him to studypolitical economy in the Canton cadre school.Every county selectedtwo people for this course in economics and finance work, and he was oneof two from Bao-an.1He had only1finished 2 years of primary schoolhimself.  AAfter two years he was sent back to Bao-an county.

Whenhecame back to Bao-an he worked at planning statistics, teaching classesto others on economic work, and also leading the management of joint

In this last capacity he was the head of thestate-private companies.planning department of the county government.

In the l957 anti-rightist campaign he was labelled a rightist, becausehe said something about grain not being plentiful enough.TThenhewassent to a labor reform camp elsewhiere in Guangdong, where he anu theordinary criminals, along with several thousand rightists, did farming.During the Great Leap Forward in l958 the intellectuals there built aSmall steel furnace, while the criminals foraged in the hills for food.This was in Bo-lo county， Guangdong.Afterhalfayearthequalityofthesteel was poor, and they disbanded operations. Later in l958 they pickedl000 of the best workers from amongg the rightists and transfered them toworkinfactoriesintheCantonarea.

He was sent to a new factory, being built near Canton, the Guangdong#l Machine Tools Plant.This was right in the middle of the Great Leap.He worked in a metallurgy shop at steel refining.Hehadworkerstatusand wages. He was a group leader in the shop.He worked here for 3 years,from1958 tothe endof 1960.1During this period, since his work was good,they removed his rightist label and taught him a skill, and sent him to the

He didn't want to do this.But the party secretarymetalworking shop.told him he would send him to Heilongjiang if he refused the assignment.

In l962, because of the 3 years of economicSo he acdeptedfor a while.hardship, he came illegally across the Hong Kong border along with a lotof other people who were coming across at that time.He has owned a smallrestaurant in Hong Kong,worked in textile shops, worked in a Chineserestaurant. for two years in England since then, and now works in arestaurant in the New Territories.Wages

The criminals from the labor camp were not given a worker grade,just l2? a month from the factory as living expenses, while the rightistswere in the same situation,but got 28¥.When the labels were taken awaythey were given a regular worker grade. But he left shortly after his labelwas taken off, so he was never fixed at a scale.They had no bonus system,just spiritual incentives.The criminals could have their sentences reducedfor good work and behavior.1Rightists could have their label taken away.Workers could be chosen as labor models.They had an 8grade wage system inthe factory then, but the highest worker was only gradee7.

-1-

There were no piece rates, and there were no quotas for individualworkers.But there were targets for the whole plant. HHowdidtheyknowwhether a worker is doing a good job?TThey had a small group meetingevery wednesday where they had criticism and self-criticism, and this in-cluded an evaluation of one another's work performance.Guangdongg #l Machine Tools Factory,1958-60

The plant as a whole had about l200 employees, and was under pro-vincial leadership.It had carpentry, casting, metalworking, mold-makingshops.They worked on a 3 shift system.

The informant was a group leader in his production group in the metal-working shop (jingong).The group leader has to keep a close watch on thethought of the people in the group, as well as the production situation.He was appointed by the plant leader to be the group0 leader because he hadbeen a group leader in the Bolo county labor camp.There were about 18people in the group, but it fluctuated because workers were beingtransfered in and out accordingg to the demands of production.There was novicegroup0leader or any other people helping him in the group.TTheyonlyhad shop directors and vice shopdirectors, but no one in the small group

The production group leader gave cut workwas6 assistant group leader.assignments for the day.After the work day was over, he was responsiblefor leading political study.He did not have forms and reports to fill out.

The amount of political study meetings depended on the pc?iticalcampaign of the time.But usually they studied two hours after work eachday.Most of this was reading the newspapers, and they read about thecurrent campaigns--3 red flags, great leap forward, small steel furnaces.They had meetings devoted to criticism and self-criticism two times amonth.！When they have a campaign, each person had to express their opinionsabout the campaign.The group leader had to write a summary report on themeetings conclusions for the party branch secretary.If the upper levelleaders did not like the conclusions reached, they would talk to thegroup leader about how to do ideological work and teach the workers.Ifthere was a worker who had expressed an adverse opinion, he may be singledout by leaders in an all-shop criticism meeting..If there was a productionproblemof any sort, they would set aside time after work to talk about itand solve it.But there were no fixed times for this.AAlso they mightorganize workers to study the advanced experiences of other factories.

For quality inspection,tthey selected a grade 7 worker to do the in-

He was under the leadershipof thespection for the metalworkingshop.

The grindinggshopoinspected all the piecesshop director, just a worker.brought into their shop once again, according to the blueprints.Therewas no great influence of the Great Leap Forward in the plant, sincethe plant was still being built during this time. So there was nothingspecial going on.

Almost all of the people in his group were rightists or criminals.Oneguy was a lecturer from a Yunnan University who had tried to escape toIndonesia, and there were several other intellectuals.

His anti-rightist problem in fact was not a real problem ofrightism.He mad e the mistake of agreeingg with the viewpoint of articlesin People's Daily articles written by people like Luo Rongzhang and Zhang

Also, the other cadresBaijun, people who later were declared rightists.he worked with were jealous of him because he was so young and had movedup to equal position as those who had worked in the party for years before

The thing they grabbed onto was the fact that he repeated aliberation.story he heard from a friend that the Russians had removed all the equipmentfrom factories in Manchuria after the war.This was called anti-Soviet andtherefore rightist.

-2-

描述：

