id: 882b6cbc88
标题：Hong Kong Interviews: Informant No. 10
日期：1980-1-20
是否是时间段：false
作者：Andrew G. Walder
来源：
标签：文章
书籍：Hong Kong Interviews: Informant No. 10
书籍作者：Andrew G. Walder

正文：
INFORMANT NO. 10PERSONALDATA

Sex:FemaleAge:50Education:

middle school graduateTotal Years Relevant Experience:

23Last Year of Relevant Experience: 1978

Year Left China:  1978Initial Immigration Status:  unknown, probably legalNative Place/Overseas Connections:Guangdong native/os connections unknownClass Background/Political Designation:

unknown

OCCUPATIONALHISTORYSUMMARYPositions Held:  l) Clerical worker, various offices, large tractor manu-

facturing complex (probably Luoyang), 1956-78Administrative Level of Work Unit/(No. of employees):

1) unknown (probably Ministry)/(over 10,0o0)Experience in Full-time Manual Labor (for non-worker occupations);

unknownAPPOINTMENTS:1

TOTAL HOURS:  1.5

PAGES TEXT:

2No.10Occupational History

(1/20/80, 1.5 hrs.)

The informant has a middle school education, graduating in l950.Afterwards she worked as a clerk in a bank for a period, then later wastransferred to the staff of a large integrated enterprise with over lo,000employees, which produced tractors. (This can be no other than LuoyangTractor Factory--she says she is, and sounds like, a Cantonese, but saysthat this factory was in 'north China').It is also possible that theplant produced military equipment like armored cars and tanks in oneof its branch factories, sinceetheinformant isquitesuspiciousandvague, keeping her answer to questions about the plant very short. Shebegan work at this enterprise around 1956 and worked there right upuntil she1eftChinainl978.She worked at several different levelsin the enterprise, in several different offices, but was always a staffworker.She did accounting work, and also production control (aiaodu).Organization of the Enterprise

The top office of the enterprise was called the 'General Plant'(zongchang).There were several departments at the general plant level,

The departments at the branch factory level are ke.and they were called chu.There were several chu, for example, the accounting department, thetechnical department, and the personnel department.  The accounting office,in which she worked for a period, was very large--it had 60-7o staff workers.These chu personnel are themselves divided into sections, called ke.  Theirdepartment was divided into the finance and planning section, the costs section,and the cashier's section.

There were other departments at the generalplant level (chu)--safety. transportation, materials and supply, sales.

She also worked for a period in the foundry, a branch factory (fenchang)in the complex.All the branch factories were in the same area--this wasjust an organizational term.The foundry.had several departments for thestaff (ke); five to be exact--planning control (jihua diaodu), which had6-7 people; personnel, labor, wages, and safety, which had 3-4 people;accounting, which had 6-7; administration, which had 3-4, and technicaldepartment, which had about lo or more.

A branch factory was divided into shops and small groups.Analternative terminology is to call the branch factory a shop, and theshopa section (gongduan)， which you can do if you consider the generalplant level as the factory level.

But this would be an awfully largeshop--her foundryhad over 8o0 workers, so they called it a branchfactory.

There were 9 branch factories in all, and hers was not thebiggest.

Her foundry was in fact a huge spare parts casting'shop'.

Thesize of the ke or staff departments varied according to policies, but generallythe accountingdepartment (hers) had about 6-7 people.She stresses theparallelism in the overall enterprise structure.

The general plant leveldepartments (chu) are equivalent in level to the branch factory office.The ke or departments in the branch factory are parallel with the shops(or sections) in the branch factory. So the leaders at each level aregiven equivalent grades, since they are at parallel levels in the overallorganizational structure.

Each of the Shops(orC gongduan depending on the terminology wechoose) has their own office, which includes a person who handles plancontrol (jihua diaodu yuan), statistics (tongji yuan)，a telephone operator,office helpers, and several technicians.These people all help the foremanin the section (gongzhang).

-1-

Below the sections are the group leaders (banzu zhang), who superviseabout lo-20 workers and have no helpers, and who participate in production.They have no offices, but there are rooms on the shop floor where workerscan go periodically to rest.Wages

She was a grade 22 administrative cadre when she first startedin the plant.In l956 there was a major wage readjustment and she wasraised to grade 2l. In l975 there was a wage readjustment, but thistime only for the lowest paid.(The informant is clearly ill at ease and suspicious. She scrutinizes everyquestion as if to try to tell whether they are a trap. Answers are vague, andits like pulling teeth. She gets more ill at ease, rather than less, as thetime goes on.  Finally I decide to give her an opportunity to bow outgracefully. I

conclude the interview early and ask her to set an appointmentfor next time. She gives us a number to call, and picks up her letter asshe leaves.  I suspect she does not intend to come back, and she seems toknow that I know.Sure enough, the number is a false one and we neversee her again. It is unfortunate, because this is a major plant and herexperience was long and full.)

-2~

描述：

