id: 1a8fb89f31
标题：Hong Kong Interviews: Informant No. 1
日期：1979-11-10,1979-11-17,1979-11-21,1979-11-28
是否是时间段：false
作者：Andrew G. Walder
来源：
标签：文章
书籍：Hong Kong Interviews: Informant No. 1
书籍作者：Andrew G. Walder

正文：
INFORMANT NO. 1PERSONAL.DATA

Sex:  MaleAge: 38Education: [University Graduate (Qinghua, construction design)Total Years Relevant Experience:11

Year left China: 1973Last Year of Relevant Experience: 1972Initial Immigration Status: LegalNative place/Overseas Connections: Fuzhou/noknownOS connectionsClass Background/Political Designation:

working class

OCCUPATIONALHISTORYSUMMARYPositions Held: 1) Carpenter, Shanghai Steel Plant, 1957-59

2) University student, 1959-64

3) Designer, Shanghai Municipal Designing Institute, l966-73Administrative Level of Work Unit/(No. of employees):

1) Municipal Metallurgy Bureau/(l0,000)

3) Municipal Construction Bureau/ (unknown)Experience in Full-time Manual Labor (for non-worker occupations):

Construction Laborer, Shanghai Construction Company,

June 1964-January 1966 (post-graduate labor tempering).APPOINTMENTS:4

TOTAL HOURS:7

PAGES TEXT: 7No. 111-10-79 1 hr.Occupational History:1 Informant is 38 years old, born in Fuzhou, graduatedfrom a Fuzhou middle school at age l7. Father was a carpenter, and at thattime he accompanied him to Shanghai to take up work as carpenters in differentplants in the Shanghai Iron and Steel Co.Since his father had taught himthe trade, and since there was at that time a shortage of skilled workers,he was directly appointed to a skilled worker pay grade, and did not haveto go through apprenticeship.1He worked at the steel plant from March1957 to September 1959.While there, he studied in the plant eveningschool.In l959 he took the university examination and, because hehad a working class background, was given preference and accepted atQinghua University.He studied architecture and design at Qinghua, grad-uating in 1964. 1After graduation in mid-l964, he was assigned to do manuallabor--mostly mixing concrete by hand--at construction sites run by theShanghai Construction Co.This was national policy at the time of the'siqing" (four cleans) movement. Around January l966 he was assignedto a Municipal Designing Institute （ 言 β完）in Shanghai,where hedesigned factory buildings as an architect.Around June l966, he joined

the radical workers' (organization, Gongren Zaofan Dui, shortly after it-.-.-was formed--secretly.During the Cultural Revolution he was an active

member of this group, doing no work, but spending all his time travellingto various plants around Shanghai to engage in propaganda and other politicalactivities.  Afterwards, he continued to work at the designing instituteuntil he left for Hong Kong, legally, in l973.11-17-79 2 hrs.Steel Plant Experience,March1957-September 1959.The plant hadabout lQ,ooo workers andstaff，about 4% of whichhe estimateswere cadres。There were five shops, each of which had from l,ooo -2,000workers: l) Open-hearth furnace shop （ 平 x卢 ), where the ore smeltingwas done， 2)an electric furnace shop, 3) a Bessemer furnace shop,4) a steel rolling shop, 5) and an iron casting shop.

Each shop was dividedinto about 4-5 sections.Sections were dividedaccording to the work process done.1For example, in one of the shops therewere three large Siemens-Martin furnaces（. 丁 X² ）.In front of themwasonesection.Each section was divided into three shifts （ 王y王 ).Eachof these three shifts comprises a "large group" ( 幺且)， usualiy numberingabout 20 people.Each large group was split into three small groups (小 幺且 ).

In the shop which contained the Siemens-Martin furnaces, the systemof organization fit onto the technological process as follows:One sectionhandled all three furnaces.It was divided into three shifts.Each shiftcomprised a large group, each furnace (3) comprised a small group.Thegroup leader of each of these small groups of about 7-8 people was simultaneouslycalled a furnace chief （x户  ).Most of the small group leaders were partymembers.Informant knows this because most of them seemed to attend Partymeetings withinn the plant, which were open only to Party members.Veryfewworkers were in thee Party--about l0%.About 60% of the small group leaderswere Party members.(See attached organizational chart drawn by informant).

Informant's job as carpenter was in the services section, repair

He did any repair or building work in the plant which involvedgroup.woodworking--door frames, windows, desks.1His section included both carpentersand cement workers.

Normally all carpenters had to go through an apprenticeship,Apprenticeship system:

-1-but the informant skipped it because he had been trained by his father andbecause there was a shortage of skilled labor. Normally, apprenticeswere appointed for three years, and were paid 28y per month for the entireperiod. At the end of the period, the masters tested their apprentices,most of whom passed.Those who didn't pass failed mostly because ofpolitical problems or because they had personal conflicts with masters.Once an apprentice was appointed to full fledged carpenter, the salarywas 38Y, starting pay for skilled workers. rhe highest pay a skilled workerreceived was about looy.Wages:

The scale for skilled workers ran about 5y per month higher thanthat for regular workers.1Informant says that skilled workers were dividedinto seven grades:11） 38Y,2) 48Y,3)@56Y, 4) @60+Y, 5)@70-80Y, whi1ethe highest was about looy.(Informant not entirely clear on exact payrates).Most workers were below the 5th grade, and most were concentratedin grades 3 and 4.

The scale for regular workers began at 33Y.SSome older workersmade as much1 as 80y, but most earned about 5oy. High temperature supplementsare the only kind remembered by the informant, and these were about 6o centsper day.This means that those who worked in front of the ovens couidmake up to an extra l5y per month.

Most workers lived in factory dorms or apartments.Almost allapprenticeslivedinon-sitedormitories.sSomeoftheapartmentswereelsewhere in Shanghai.

Bonuses: 1During the period up to but not including l958, theonly bonuses given were those for technical innovations, patents oninventions.Near the end of 1957 or early 1958, a regular bonus systemwas instituted, and they were distributed each month.They averaged3-5Y per month, and almost everyone received one except when they hadpolitical problems, or were not active enough in political study or campaigns.

The amount of bonus for each individual was fixed in a monthlyappraisal meeting within the small group, led by the group leader.1In thesemeetings, each person'sS case was discussed one after another.Workers inthe group raised their opinions about the person's showing, politicalthought， punctuality, work habits.Afterwards a discussion ensued andthe group leader came to a decision which incorporated these suggestions.Informant says that in practice, everyone in the group received thesesmall bonuses in equal amounts, except in rare cases.Plant Organizational Life:

Production Group Meetings: The production group met every daybeforeandafter theshift for about l5minutestodiscuss productionproblems and plans for the day, or the coming day.These were calledproduction meetings.In informant's carpenters work group the groupleader was in charge of making work assignments, in addition to discussingwork problems and possible solutions.Conflicts often broke out.in thesemeetings when1workers were unhappy with their assignments

Group0 leaders were appointed by an: election process within theproduction groups which was supervised by the Party organization.

Informalelections were held within the small groups, after an open discussion.Voting was by a show of hands and general consensus, rather than secretballot.The small group's choice had to be approved byI the Party branch.In most cases, if there was a Party member in the smallL group, this personwould end up being the group leader.(Oncesomeonewasappointedasgroupleader, he remained in the post indefinitely. There was no regularC system ofelection with fixed terms of office.sSelections were made about l957-58.

-2-Group leader remained in office indefinitely, until:

a)promoted to a higher postb)developed a political problem due to his attitude towards

a particular policy or campaign?became involved in serious conflicts with workers, in

which case he was transferred to another groupIf one was elected to a post within the small group, there was no way torefuse.The party cadre in the group counseled the person to convince

In the informant's work group, which was quite differenthim to accept.in nature from the work processes and rhythms of the steel shops(everyonewas dispersed throughout the plant), there were only two'worker-managers'One was a safety inspector, the other a sanitation inspector who wasbasically in charge of the neatness of the working areas.These peoplewere chosen through the same process used for selecting group leaders.

Section-level meetings:  Production group leaders met regularlywithin sections to discuss special problems, new production tasks, oraccidents.No worker participation.

Once a month shop leaders would get their

Shop-level meetings:new plans for the next month.When these plans were sent dowm, the Shopchief would call a mobilizational meeting of all the workers in the shop.All the workers collected in the plant dining hall, listened to speechiesby the shop leader and various other leading personnel.  Workers voicedtheir approval and enthusiasm, ssometimes offering suggestions about howbetter to fulfill the quotas.

Workers' Congress:

The plant workers'congress met once a year.Each year, each production group in the plant, depending on its size,selected one or two representatives..This wass done by discussion andgeneral acclamation.

If there was aconflict within the group over therepresentative, ie. a tie between two people, then the issue was sent

The criteria forto the shop-level Party organization for a decision.a representative were l) good politics, 2) good work, 3) good relationswith workers in the group. The same people seemed to be elected represen-tatives year in and year out.It was considered something of an honor tobe selected.

At the Congress itself, which lasted about one week, the plant Partysecretary, Union leaders, and other plant administrators gave speechesabout production tasks, problems.:Documents were distributed for worker

Afterwards, the delegates returned to their productiondelegates to study.groups to report on what they had heard, and to relay the Party's messages.

Workers can give their representatives suggestions about work,or livelihood problems, which their delegates can bring up at the congress.These production group meetings usually held after work.

Political Study:1Production groups also had political study,normally twice a week for one hour each time.Informant's service sectionmet during work hours, but the steel shops couldn't halt work, so theymet afterwards.The frequency of these political study-discussion meetingsincreased during a campaign, in which case they had political study everyday.The production group leaders were also in charge of these politicalstudy meetings.11-21-79 2 hrs.Great Leap Forward Activities:

The main difference during the great leap was the pace of work,which was faster, the increased intensity of organized activities, andthe longer work hours.This also gave rise to some serious qualityproblems in the steel-making process, on which the informant is not too clear.Apparently many suggestions were implemented which incorporated local (chinese)

-3-methods, or ways of speeding up the heating process. The result.was steelthat wasn't 'really steel'--in other words, it was very brittle.

Another special characteristic of the Great Leap in this plant wasthe frequent meetings to criticize conservatives (rightists).Thesewere usually engineers and intellectuals within the plant who opposedsome of the suggestions and methods proposed by the Party during thisperiod. TThis was considered a political problem.  These people wereput on a stage at large, all-plant rallies, at which time they werecriticized publicly.Afterwards, they went back to the shops, havinglost a great deal of face and no longer with the authority of theirformer positions (ie., their technical decisions were no longer heeded).

There were also three-in-one meetings where workers, technicians,andcadres discussedtechnical problemsandinnovations.This is wheremany of the rationalization proposals were developed--especially onhow to implement traditional methods.  These meetings were led by workers,according to the informant.He did not participate in any of these, sohe is not entirely clear about their internal workings.Party Organization:  The Party had an organizational hierarchy whichparalleled the administrative hierarchy and overlapped with it at severalpoints.  The lowest level of Party offices where full-time, non-productivelabor cadres worked was the shop party branch.office.  BEachshoppartybranch office had four staff members: the branch party secretary(党.爬支 书言已),and cadres in charge of personnel records, files (personal dossiers),and security(internal plant police). (see attached organizational chartsupplied by the informant).

The'next lowest level in the Party organization is the Party branch,which exists at the section level. The branch secretary is engaged parttime in productive activities of some sort, managerial or otherwise. Thenext lowest level, the bottom of the Party hierarchy, is the Party Cell,which is coterminous with the production group and the study group. TheParty cell leader is a full-time participator in production.

Leadership positions in the Party hierarchy often overlap withadministrative leadership positions. Sometimes the Plant Party Secretary:head of the Party Committee, is simultaneously the Plant Director.Evenif he is not, he is still important in plant operations. At times, theGeneral Branch secretaries are also Shop Directors. Most of the SectionChiefs are also Party Branch secretaries.And most of the ProductionGroup Leaders are also the Party member in the group, and they are theheadofthePartyycell and leader of political study groups.

The Party has its owm system of meetings, closed to non-memberslike the informant.The Communist Youth League also has officers ateachlevel，asdoestheLabor Union.Informant feels that the labor unionis just a formality, and is largely responsible only for welfare services.He volunteers that the Union has no real power of its own.

4-Organizational Chart, Shanghai Iron and Steel Co., Plant X

Plant Headquarters （广 亨β)Party Committee(党委鲁

>Administrative Headquarters

-—一Plant Director （正广长)PartySecretary（党 季书 言已）一一

5 Asst.Directors（畐/长）Administrativeand technicalOffices

(sections）（沃斗室)l） finance2).technical3) productior4) experimental laboratory5) etc.

(Administrative) Section Chief( 禾  )Shop Offices (5)( 事 司)

ShopDirector（车尼主任)PartyGeneralBranch(车间党恩支)

ShopAdministrative and technicalParty General Branchr Secretary --

offices（党总支书纪）Party Branch Offices

SecretaryPersonnel officerFiles OfficerSecurityofficer

> Sections（工段）

Section Chief（工 丧)Party Branch（党支 部B）éParty Branch Secretary（支β书）

Shifts ( ）"Large Group"( 大 幺且)

Shift Leader （五王 )

→Production Groups（生产小且)PartyCell（党小幺且)

p -----－ Group Leader （丝且长)Party Member(s) (Usually Group

Leaders)

While I was at the Steel Plant, there were only two workers fired thathe was aware of. Both were workers who had political run-ins with theParty secretary--had different opinions.After they were removed from thefactory， they had no unit, went to do temporary labor.1If one made aserious political error, then the person would be sent to the countryside.

In general, temporary laborers got lower pay, and harder kinds of work.They are hired from street party committees, who introduce the workersto the enterprise.Temporary laborers had their own political studymeetings.More favored temporary workers could sign a long-term contract.Cultural Revolution:

After I graduated from Qinghua U. in l964 (September), he was sent fora year ofumanual labor at various construction sites around Shanghai.Hesays this was the policy at that time.

Hewaspaid on the technical cadresscale, at 48Y.In January l966 he was finallyassigned to a technicalunit--one of Shanghai's Municipal Designing Institutes.

The rebel organization--Gongren Zaofan Dui--was established aroundJune.The reason was to oppose the work teams sent into units by theParty centre.  I opposed the work teams in his own unit. He joined duringJune, l966, secretly, because he opposed the work team in his unit. Heopposed the work team because they were a bit too enthusiastic about theirwork and criticized too many people in his unit.(Nov 28, 2 hrs.)

Previously, during the last half of l965, there had been a "4 cleans"

The team that cameParty work team sent to his construction work site.to.thesitehadthreemembers.They led workers in mass meetings wherethe leadership was criticized, and the workers who were activists inthese meetings were allowed to0join the work team, which enlarged to l5.The work team urged workers to criticize the unit leaders and to pasteup wallposters.If the activists were too active or critical in theircriticisms, the Party work team (in cahoots with the Party committee ofthe enterprise), could have a person declared counter-revolutionary,and they then would organize a mass meeting where this person would becriticized.

The work teams put labels on many people, and many of these labelswere not cleared up until after the Cultural Revolution.Thesewhowerelabelled were criticized in their small groups, they madee confessions andself-criticisms, were forced to stand in the sun for long periods of timeuntil they confessed， etc.They were isolated during work hours from theother workers, and had to eat by themselves. The work team members wouldthen take turns watching these people; they couldn't go home, and had tostay on the premises.They wore people down from lack of sleep, tiredness.About 20% of the employees were criticized by the work team, and a smallernumber were actually declared counter-revolutionary. jEachsmallgrouphad their own counter-revolutionary.I thinks that these work teams"made a big thing out of nothing"(xiaoti dazuo).

At the beginning of the cultural revolution those attacked by the workteams joined rebel groups early.Many of I's friends were counter-revolutionaries,so he joined with them.About August 1966(he has changed the date now),I joined the Worker's Rebel Committee.At first he just distributed hand-written political tracts.The 'five good' workers tended not to join therebel organizations.The rebels were people who: had labels, young workers,temporary and contract workers, and demobilized soldiers.

Later, when workers left the factories for the streets, they still werepaid. Managers didn't dare prevent or discontinue the paying of salaries.

-5-The rebels criticized Party Committees and work teams in factories, notthe technicians).When managers were criticized, they were dragged infront of mass meetings, made to kneel， spread their arms out behind them(do the 'airplane'), and sometimes kicked and beaten until blood camefrom their mouths.  Some were even killed--beheaded--later in theCR. Many were locked up in 'cowsheds'. Later, some cadres were criticizedfor their privileges, and special lifestyles.

I didn't work for two years during the Cultural Revolution. He feelsthat most workersopposedvMao.

Immediately after the CR, there was a return to a very strict politicalatmosphere within the work group.  It was very easy to get declared acounter-revolutionary is you didn't come to work then--or you at leastwould be seriously criticized. "Grasp revolution and promote production"(zhua geming, cu shengchan)i--this slagan meant that workers were beingintimidated.They worked once again because theydidn't want to becriticized or labelled a counter-revolutionary

Isays that he was very disappointedwith the Cultural Revolution,aswere many others who.thought that China would become a more democraticcountry.He returned to work at the designing institute in l968 andstayed there until he left China legally in l973.

一6-

描述：

