id: aef3d1c46e
标题：Hong Kong Interviews: Informant No. 9
日期：1979-12-14,1980-1-7,1980-1-18
是否是时间段：false
作者：Andrew G. Walder
来源：
标签：文章
书籍：Hong Kong Interviews: Informant No. 9
书籍作者：Andrew G. Walder

正文：
INFORMANT NO. 9PERSONAL DATA

Sex: MaleAge:47Education:  University graduate (Nankai, mathematics)Total Years Relevant Experience:26

Year Left China:  1977Last Year of Relevant Experience: l977Initial Immigration Status:  LegalNative Place/Overseas Connections:Shanghai native/os connections unknownClass Background/Political Designation:

unknown

OCCUPATIONAL HISTORY SUMMARYPositions Held: l) Staff, Labor and Wages Department, Tianjin Machinery

Factory, 1950-522) Student, Nankai University, 1952-553) Technician, Acoustics Research Institute, Chinese

Academy of Social Sciences, Peking, 1955-77.Administrative Level of Work Unit/(No. of employees):

1) Ministry/(500)

3) Central Government/(800)Experience in Full-time Manual Labor (for non-worker occupations):

Agricultural labor most of 1958, one month per year

from 1959-64; one year of agricultural 1abor in 1964,

one month per year through 1977. No May 7 Cadre School.APPOINTMENTS:3

TOTAL HOURS: 5.5

PAGES TEXT:5No.9Occupational History

(12/14/79, 1.5 hrs.)

The informant was born in l933 in Shanghai. He was studying at amiddle school in Shanghai on a scholarship when the city was liberatedin May l949.He was to have graduated in June, so he almost finishedmiddle school.After Communist administration began, he took a test forjob placement and was placed in a job in the central heavy industrialministry, and assigned to a Tianjin machinery factory.This was 1950.While he was there he worked in the labor and wages department, settingquotas for workers based on Soviet practices.

In 1952 he entered NankaiUniversity in Tianjin, and studied in the mathematics department.

Hegraduated in 1955.In l955 he was assigned to the Acoustics ResearchInstitute of the Chinese Academy of Social Sciences.He did researchrelated to the development and production of radio equipment, mostlyspeakers.His job was to design parts for radios, and this involvedgoing to factories to talk over requests for new designs and to studydesign problems. He did this work until he came to Hong Kong legally in1977.Tianjin Machinery Factory Experience, l950-52(1/7/80，2 hrs.)

He was assigned to the Labor and Wages Planning Department (laozijihua ke), and his job title’ was:'technical quota specialist' (jishu ding'eyuan). He was sent to Peking for a period to listen to lectures by

Sovietmanagement specialists.'Two people were sent from his plant, but peoplefrom all over China attended.Theylearned how toset time quotas for piecework, for use in later bonus schedules.They would calculated rest periods,bathroom breaks, processing time, and come up with a time standard.Theywould study worker output in the past, calculate averages and come upwith a standard.Then they would discuss the standard with.the workers

If there were disagreemtns they would see the shopandmayberevisethem.director, tell him the problem, and get one of the faster workers todemonstrate and tell others how to do the job in the completed time.Other workers would watch the demonstration.

He was one of two such workers in the Labor and Wages PlanningDepartment, who devoted their time to quota setting.The other staffworkers dealt with personnel matters and with labor.The cadre department(ganbu ke) handled cadre personnel matters.The entire department hadabout lo+ staff members.

The plant was state owmed and administered. The old boss (laoban)had run offf to Taiwan, and there had since been a big personnel turnover.Some of the old accountants and wage/personnel office workers remained, butmost officials were new.The new head of the plant was the plant director(zheng changzhang).He oversaw all aspects of plant management.HHe repre-sented the plant in its dealings with outside organs, on markets, etc.He was a Party member, an oldCadre with the PLA. This was a common setof qualifications for plant directors. His job was to make reports, handlepolitical work. He did not do much about production work, he left thatto others.1He was also the Party secretary for the plant.There weretwo vice-directors--one handled technology, the other handled safety.One was a Party member, the other not.

There were six staff departments.

The personnel. department (renshike) handled cadre affairs, promotions and evaluations (this is what he calledthe cadre department earlier).1There was his own department, the Labor andWagesDepartment.

There was a security dept. (baowei ke), which handledthe physical security of the plant.

There was the finance (caiwu)department-1-also called the accounting (kuaiji) department, which handled all financial

There was an equipment and materials (qicai)department,and money matters.which handled ordinary machines and tools, and decided when they were wornout, when it was time to repair them.There was a supply (gongxiao) department,and also a technical (jishu) department.The technical department drew upblueprints, plans, and helped solve technical problems on the shop floor.There was also a union that handled workers' welfare. Workers gave l% oftheir wages as dues6(social expenses, shehui fei).!The state contributed 2%for each worker who paid.This was for both workers and staff.Mostoftheheadsof staff departments were Party members.

There were 4 shops, numbered 1-4.They varied in size from 40-l00 workers.Each shop had a director, only some of whom were Party members.:Later,however, they changed to a system where all directors were Party membersand were responsible for politics, while the vice-directors were technicians.Each shop office had a statistician (tongji yuan) who did calculations foroutput, attendance, supplies.This cadre did basic level accounting andstatistics, and he was a full-time office worker.He calculated attendance

There was a shop that made parts, one for assembling, one forrates, etc.casting and forging, and one metal working shop.Each, shop was separatedinto sections (gongduan)and led by foremen1(gongzhang).The sections alsohad Party branch secretaries tohandle political work.Someforemen hadproduction posts, some did not.Each section was divided into groups witha group leader.  These leaders did have production posts. TTheir responsibilitywas to handle progress toward completion of the plan, and to make sure thatproduction proceeded accordingly.

Wages--at that time the lowest wage in the factory was 2o¥.Therewas no 8 grade wage system.The highest wage was loo￥.

Meetings--everyone in the plant was a member of a small group of lessthan l0 people.They met every day for l hour, right after work started from8-9am.The mostly studied the book "The History of Social Development".But during campaigns, like the sanfan wufan, they studied and met all day,every day.There were three stages to the sanfan wufan--first study, secondcriticism, and third, summing up by the Party.They formed an investigationteam to check accounts of the factory.Most of the people who were criti-cized were employees from before liberation.

I had applied repeatedly to Universities over the years. To takethe entrance exam, the director of the plant had to agree, so finally hedid and I passed. He had staff'chushen (zhiyuan).His chengfen, or classdesignation, was also staff.University Graduation, Job Assignments

After graduation, he was assigned to the Chinese Academy of SocialSciences, Electronics Research Institute (later changed to the AcousticsResearchInstitute).Students needed good political performance (biaoxian)to get good job assignments.  You could state your preferences, but only asmall number of people can get their preferred jobs.I had very high grades(in fact the highest) in all subjects, but only average political performance.So he couldn't go to graduate school or get a better job.

His situation wasnot as good as those having average grades and outstanding politics.

Whatdoesitmeantohavegood politics?Astudent hastorepeatedlyreport his thinking to the Party secretary, and continuously inquireetoapply for Party membership.

I had no desire for this.So those with goodpolitics got preferences in assignments.They usually got their way throughthis informal method.

-2-

(1/18/80, 2 hrs.)AcousticsInstituteExperience

The researchers could choose their own research topics, either bygroups or by individuals.Then they would discuss the project and getapproval from the leading cadres.He did loudspeaker research. He drewup designs, went to factories and had them build prototypes. Then hewould inspect the prototype and test it.

There were 700-8000 employees in the institute.iAt the top was theinstitute head (suozhang)， and the partycommittee.The institute was dividedinto several departments (chu), such as personnel, finance, equipment,logistics.1Each department was divided further into sections (ke).Forexample, the equipment department was divided into the spare parts section,the equipment section, and the supplies section.The research workers weredivided into offices(yanjiu shi), there were four 'research offices' in all.Ultrasonics (chaosheng), water acoustics(shuisheng), low frequency acoustics(cisheng), and electrical acoustics (diansheng).The size of each office wasbetween 40-l00 people.1Each office is divided into groups depending onresearch projects, about 5-l0 people apiece.1Each grouphaditsown officespace.

I's own work was in the electrical acoustics office, doing work onspeakers.. He also taught part time at a scientific and technical university(math). He was a lecturer (jiangshi).He taught part time until theCultural Revolution, and then stopped.

There were no classes during theCR.Then afterwards the university moved to Anhui Provincee(around 1970),and thereafter he did research work and nothing else.At that time, manyuniversities moved to other areas to help agriculture, geology, etc.

Atthe institute, he was an assistant researcher (zhuli yanjiuyuan). He beganat grade l2 on the technical cadre scale, and moved up to 8 during hiscareer.Politics and Research

During the Great Leap, he went in rotation to rural areas for manuallabor, along with the rest of the institute members.TThis was for an averageof less than one month per year,.all done in one visit. He lived in a villagein the Peking suburbs.But during major political campaigns, some would laterstay as long as one year.During the Great Leap he worked for most of 1958in a village outside Peking.Then he did one month a year until l964,during the 4 cleans, when he did one year in an Anhui village.Then untilhe left in l977 he did about one month of labor per year, sometimes in factories.He did not go to a May7cadreschoolaftertheCulturalRevolution.Heargued with others that he had already done 2 one-year stints in the country-side, so why should he go again? He won that argument. when he went todo his month of manual labor in the factories, he just did odd jobs.Therewas no real technical work for him and he did not help solve problems, thepurpose was thought reform.Usually he went to a machinery plant--no relationto his expertise.

Of course, during these periods--the Great Leap and Four Cleans--about 2o% of the researchers were gone at any one time, so their researchworked stopped.  But people who stayed in research institute spent a greatdeal of time reading documents.This shortened their work time. They alsotried to sett up a steel furnace in their courtyard during the Great Leap,but couldn't produce any good steel, so they quit.Their technical sectionwas in charge, but they had no knowledge of steel production.

In the cultural revolution, they stopped work completely at one timefor several months.During the Cultural revolutions there were many criticismsof the technicians of the institute by the staff workers (zuoyuan).Thiscriticism was mostly of the higher ranking people--professors, etc.:Ididn't

-3-talk to people much, anyway, so he was never really attacked.

Thesewhowere criticized were put on a stage, 'did the airplane', etc.

There were a small percentage of activists, and a small percentageof people criticized. Most non-Party people just weren't interested, couldnot go to work because it was too dangerous, but they could not oppose the

They just went to meetings all day.They could not read books.movement.The party committee directed the activities within the institute.TTherewere two factions, but both were directed and manipulated behind the scenes.The Party Committee remained in control throughout. Many of the activistswanted to become officials and that is why they were so active.This disruptedsituation lasted from 1966-74.About 90% of the personnel in the institutewent to May 7 Cadre schools. This practice continued until it taperedoff around 1975.Political Study

From 1955-57, they had political study on Saturday, for 8 hours.But 80% of their total time was spent on research.TThis was the best periodfor researchers.And every day there was l hour of work time devoted topolitical study.

AlsO22 evenings a week, 2 hours a time. From 1958-60,at least half of each day was spent in political study. From l960-63,things were a bit better as far as meetings go, but supplies and foodwere difficult to get.They studied every Saturday， but not at allduring the week. From l964-65, when the 4 cleans started, they stopped workfor weeks and studied all day long.During 1966-74 they had politicalstudy every day during work hours.EBut even if you wanted to do research,it was very difficult to get materials and approval.So most people justchecked reading materials out of the institute library and studied on theirown when they had the time.Generally. their research work stopped duringthe period, and that work which continued did so ineffectively.

During 1974-75, Deng Xiaoping and Hu Yaobang got things going againand people started to do research work, and political study was reducedsomewhat. People were more willing tc do research work.During 1976-77,there was nothing but campaigns and study.Work almost completely stoppedagain after its brief revival.First the criticism of Deng, then of theGang of 4.During the anti-Gang of 4 criticisms, they criticized peoplein their unit who were their followers, but not too severely.These weremostly cadres in the personnel department and other administrative departmentswho were younger cadres.The older cadres had stood aside in favor of youngfaction leaders who were promoted to higher administrative positions duringthe Cultural Revolution. The old ones stood aside, usually claiming illnessand staying at home.When Deng came back in 1974-5, the old ones came backand cooperated with the younger ones, but after the Gang of 4 fell, theyoung ones were demoted back to ordinary administrative work--their originaljobs.I says that when there is a leadership change at the top, as there sooften is, it means bad luck for the people.Wages for Researchers

The technical cadre scale, which applied to researchers, went somethinglikethis:Grade 1）330¥，2）289¥,...5）180¥，6） 149¥，7）126¥，8） 109¥,9） 89¥, l0） 78¥, 1l） 69¥, l2） 62¥.He is not sure about the lower grades,since he was never at that level. In l956 there was a large readjustmentin wages, in 1963 there was a small one, and in l977  a large one. No others.When he graduated he was at grade l2, and during the l956 readjustment hewas raised to ll. In l963 he was raised to 10. In l977 he was raised tograde 9. All of these raises depended on your length of work service.

-4-A certain percentage was fixed for number of persons to be given raisesin the institute. Those with political problems would not get raised,but most others who met the criteria as to length of service wouldget raises. They had the promotion of raising position, but not wages,during the Cultural Revolution era.

一5-

描述：

