id: 34d447e3b8
标题：Hong Kong Interviews: Informant No. 60
日期：1980-6-26,1980-6-27
是否是时间段：false
作者：Andrew G. Walder
来源：
标签：文章
书籍：Hong Kong Interviews: Informant No. 60
书籍作者：Andrew G. Walder

正文：
INFORMANT NO.60

PERSONALDATAAge:40

Sex: MaleEducation:'Technical college graduate (industrial chemistry)Total Years Relevant Experience: 14Last Year of Relevant Experience: 1976

Year Left China: 1976Initial Immigration Status:  LegalNative Place/Overseas Connections:

Thailand 0S, returned 1950sClass Background/Political Designation:

OS

OCCUPATIONAL HISTORY SUMMARYPositions Held: l) Staff technician, Production Department, Cement Factory,

Fujian, 1963-662) Staff technician, Production Department, Candy Factory,

Fujian, 1968-703) Statistician, Production Office, Construction Company,

Fujian, 1970-76Administrative Level of Work Unit/(No. of employees):

1) County/(l000)2)County/ (300)

3) probably County/(l000)Experience in Full-time Manual Labor (for non-worker occupations):

agricultural labor, 1967-68APPOINTMENTS:  2

TOTAL HOURS: 5.5

PAGES TEXT:

6No.60Occupational History

(6/26/80, 2.5 hrs.)

The informant was born in Thailand, an overseas Chinese with roots inFujian. He returned to China in the l950s. He graduated from a higherlevel technical school (dazhuan) after three years of post-middle schoolstudy, and was assigned to the production department in a Cement factoryunder county administration in southern Fujian in l963.The plant hada 1ittle over 1000 employees. He worked there until l966, when he was sentto a farm for two years.In l968, he was sent to a production departmentin a candy factory, also under county administration, which had over300employees.He worked there for two years.EFrom 1970-75 he worked asa statistician in the production office of a construction company, but wasnot a leading person, just ordinary staff.This company had around 1ooo+employees.He came out legally in l976.

He studied industrial chemistry in technical school, but they hadclosed many plants during the early l960s so he was not assigned to achemical plant. In the first two factories he was a vice departmenthead, while in the third he was an ordinary staff member.!This was becauseat that time they looked down on overseas Chinese and didn't want themto be in leadership positions.Wages

After graduation from his local higher technical school, he had oneyear of practicum at 4o+. After one year, he was made regular (zhuanzheng)and raised to 5o+. At that time, depending on the work they assigned toyou, you are given either a technical grade or administrativegrade.This is a 15 or l6 grade scale for technical cadres and a 24 or 25 gradescale for administrative cadres.  He was given an administrative gradeand it did not change once until he left in l976.

There were two wage readjustments while he was working in China.  Onewas around 1964, the other around 1972. In 1964, you had to have good workand good political thought as displayed during campaigns and politicalstudy.They had a condition for technical proficiency at each grade level,but no tests, just appraisals in groups.They also assessed work activism

They held a massand attendance, and activism in campaigns and study.meeting first to announce the wage readjustment.Then they broke up·intotheir small groups, discuss all the conditions and what they mean, and theythen have nominations and discussions.Then a name list is prepared.  Theydiscuss each nominee's qualifications, and ask for objections. ]If thereare objections, different opinions, they then discuss them. But they usuallyabide by the majority opinion.1Finally a name list is drawn up according toa fixed percentage.Then the list moves up to the shop, then to the plant

The lists areleadership for discussions about the names on the list.modified somewhat. Then the county administration gives final permissionand they gave the raises.The process was democratic, but centralized.

In l972, the conditions were different.  It was entirely accordingto years of service and whether or not you still had low wages.(Only thosewith low wages were raised to either grades 2 or 3, depending on your yearsof service.Bonuses

Before the CR, there basically were no bonuses in his plants.Butthey did have comparison and assessment meetings for outstanding workers(pingbi).

These were appraisals for advanced worker awards.They did this

-l-each quarter, and the winners got material rewards--clothing, a small amountof money.After the cultural revolution they still had appraisals foradvanced workers each quarter, but there were no material prizes.They justgave you a certificate, publicized you and told others to learn from you,and allowed you to give talks to other workers.Skilled Workers

Skilledworkers6(jishu gongren) were the electricians, welders,repairmen, machine operators, etc.They do different jobs irom ordinaryworkers. But ordinary workers can do any kind of work, while technicalworkers are specialized.BFor the same grade, technical workers get dif-ferent wages, slightly higher than the ordinary worker.The skilled workerseither go through apprenticeship periods or come from technical schools.The ordinary workers do not go through an apprenticeship period. Theproportion of skilled workers in the workforce depends on the type ofproduction in the factory.

While skilled workers are specialized, they can be switched to other kindsof work according to needs.But this is not common.

They usually switchother ordinary (putong) workers to fill vacancies in workshops.It is alsopossible for good, reliable ordinary workers to be pulled out for trainingas electricians aalong with a master electrician or other skilled master.But this is informal and not a realaapprenticeship）period.They just trainedmore skilled workers as they needed them.

Whether you became a skilled or regular worker is not defined by anyclear regulations, often it just depends on opportunities that you comeacross for training once you enter a factory.(Graduates of middle schoollevel technical schools are not to become ordinary workers.They are mostlytechnicians, but some also become skilled workers.Temporary and Contract Workers

There are differences between temporary and contract workers.Temporaryworkers are short term, just for special projects.Contract workers arefor larger periods of over a year.

They make upo for the lack of permanentworkers assigned in the state plan.

Temporary workers come from towms andcities, and the residents committees arrange for workers based on theirregistration rolls.(Contract workers usually come from the countryside,because there are too many people for the work to be done in the countryside.But there areeaalsoOcontract workers from the cities.When the contractis in effect.theyIcannot fire them unless their work is very bad.Normallytheywill just wait until the contract expires and not renew itif there is a problem.

During the cultural revolution they had contract workers in the plantfor a longtime because the upper levels stopped arranging labor assignmentsand they continued to need them.They always had temporary and contractworkers, but in l972 they gave all temporary and contract workers whohad been in the plant from before the CR a change in status to permanent.But they continued to invite new temporary and contract workers in afterthe cultural revolution too.

These temporary and contract workers do all kinds of work--ordinarymanual labor as well as skilled work.This depends on their skills andthe needs of the plant.But generally they do ordinary work.They alsotend to do harder kinds of labor because the permanent workers are a littleolder and they like to treat them better.Depending on the leader'sassessment of a contract or temporary worker's skill level and performance,they can receive 1.3, 1.4, or 1.5 ￥ a day.They get sick leave with 50% pay.They get accident insurance, paid medicine, during periods when they are

-2-working.?Their treatment in these respects is slightly below thatofpermanentworkers.Their dependents do not get medical expenseslike the permanent workers do.Discipline and Punishment

(6/27/80, 3 hrs.)

If there is a problem with someone's work, or fighting, arguing,they will first try to solve the problem within the group, in meetings,and the group leader will mediate.They are to recognize their errorsand write a self-criticism.At the same time the incident is reportedto the shop leadership.If they can't solve the problem, it goes up tothe shop leadership.  If the shopcan't solve it，then it might go up tothe security department (this is for things like fighting).

For failing repeatedly to finish quotas, they will alsoo try to solvethe problem by educating in the meetings.:If youcan't solveit rightaway, then they have criticisms in the group..If it stilldoesn't work,they can have a larger criticism meeting, and the whole affair will berecorded in the person's file.He has to write a self-criticism.Thisis a fairly serious repudiation.

The most serious punishment depends on whether or not it is an

Whether it is an enemy-peoplee contradictionenemy-people contradiction.dependsonpoliticalcurrentsat thetime.:If this is the case, youcan be declared a counter-revolutionary and expelled from the plant. andall this is handled by the security department, which will send peopleto labor reform.For 'internal'contradictions among the people, thereare two types of warning--'oral'and 'written'.

The written are moreserious, and they are placed in one's file. After this, depending onthe seriousness of the offense, you can lower a person's wage grade orcan dock wages.

You can also put a person under'supervision' (jiandu),which means he must report all his movements at regular intervals to thesecurity department, for a period that can range from 2 to six months.This also means he will be given difficult manual labor to do in theshops.The final thing for serious offenses is expulsion.AAll this isfor things like arguing, causing accidents, poor work, illicit sexualbehavior.

Criticism and education in small groups is fairly1common.Criticismat mass meetings or manual labor under supervision is more rare.  Mostcommon is the education-criticism method in the small group.

There wereonly a handful of expulsions in his years in the factories.The mostcommon reason was for illicit sexual reiations.1Also some corruption,and there were some who were expelled because of work behavior.

Butthis was not for bad work, but for cursing at leaders, fighting withcoworkers,and not wantinggtoparticipateinmasscampaigns.In all,less than lo or so.

After being expelled, people returned to whereverthey came from--city neighborhood or village.

Worker Motivation:  Generallyy workers broke down into three groups--advanced, middling, and backward.The backward ones werethe lazyoneswhodidn'tfulfillquotas, or who had ideological problems, and didn't

This last group would be criticized anony-listen to party leadership.mously in group meetings--a way of giving a warning.(Ofcourse，thedefinition of the three groups depended on how severe the leadershipwas.:Some factories had leaders who didn't dare criticize workersbecause they didn't want to risk workers having a bad opinion of them.They didn't want to destroy their ganging, or feelings of good will,with them.Other leaders were more severe and criticized workers moreactively.

3-Production Department in the Cement Factory

The general task is to handle the production of the plant.

This includesplanning, labor assignments, finance, technology, all together, becausethis was a fairly small plant.His plant only had administration, production,security. political, and supply and sales departments.

So the functionswere combined, especially in the production department.

His department had one department head and one vice-head.Also afinance officer, a cashier, 2 technicians, and one statistician.

Theinformant was the vice-head.1He handled oversight of the entire produc-tion process.He continually went to each shop to find out the situation,help solve problems. He tells the shop directors to use certain kinds ofmethodsto) solve problems.The most common problem was not meeting themonthly or weekly plans.

The department head handled allmatters, but largely concentrated onpolitical work, handling movements and political study.  But there wasno clear division of labor with the vice-head.This man was almost alwaysa party member, and usually was a member of the plant party committee. Inhis plant, this man was an old pre-liberation CcP cadre, as were many otherofthedepartmentheads.Planning and Plan Fulfillment

After receiving the yearly plan responsibility, the production depart-ment first divides the plan into quarterly and monthly targets, and alsodivides them up into shops and group.At each step in the process,meetings are held at each level among the leadership and the allocationof targets to each subunit is discussed by the leaders concerned.Thistakes place at the beginning and end of every month. First of the monthto allocate targets, at the end of the month to sum up completion.The production department divides targets up to the shop level.The shopsdivide dowm to the small group level.

And the small groups divide rightdown to individualquotas.

Once these are set, they change from time to time during the year.If there are accidents, shortages, or other problems, and the targets fora month can't be completed, this is discussed and analyzed at the end ofthe month.They decide what problem prevented plan completion.Thenthey immediatelyturn to make plans for the next month.?These wereadjusted and increased if there was a shortfall the previous month.

So production is generally lax at the beginningof the year, and atthe beginning of each month..At the end of each month, production isbusier, and at the end of the year things are also very busy.This is

The main method for havingbecause tthey are trying to finish the plan.work speed upduring these periods was to have leaaingcadres go dowm to theshops for manual labor and work alongside the workers.

On the one hand,this was in order for the cadres to experience manual labor, but there

Workers worked harder whenwas also an aspect of 'inspection' about it.the top leaders were right there in their shop.

They were somewhat afraidofthembecausetheyY had power, and might criticize them. But also, theworkers wanted to be sure the leaders had a good impression of them. sothat they would have a goodchance during the next wage readjustment.The informant used this method every month, since he was the vice-directorof the production department.

Reporting:

The production department sends a monthly reportto the county bureau.

They also send summary reports at the quarter.If they didn't fulfill the plan, they would have to explain.

If this wenton for several months in a row, the bureau would send down a work team to

6inspect and strengthen leadership.But generally speaking, it was thecompletion of the yearly plan that was the most important.

And if youmet that, the bureau usually would leave you alone.There is no parti-cular punishment or criticism for failing to meet yearly plans.Ifyoufail repeatedly, they might transfer you to another plant to try anewunder new conditions.But if you fulfill the plan every year, then youmight be transfered to a job higher up in the system, like in the bureau.This is why the plant directors want to finish the plan.

Their plant had trouble finishing their plans for the year.Thiswasbeforethee cultural revolution.

The main problem was that raw materialswere in short supply, and their equipment was not very good.So thismeant that the upper levels had a bad impression of their leadership.There were other targets in addition to output.

There were standardsset for product assortment (this was simple in their plant since theyproduced only 2 types of cement)，(quality, output(in tons), costs (per

These are the main standards.ton)， profit.

Their plant lost money theeentire time he was there.Thestatehadto supplement with funds every year so tthey couldl could continue toproduce cement.Thestatewaswillingg to do this with constructionmaterials, but would not do this for other industries.

Their plantwasnota 'planned loss' eenterprise.

They had a small profit target,but they still lost money.There were several reasons for this.Onewasirrational labor arrangements.

Workers were not producing what they weresupposed to.Theyonlygot X amount of work when they shouid have gotten2X.The other problem was wasteful expenditures.

Theleaderscouldspendmoney on anything they wanted, and the financial personnel had no power to

He could invite other cadress to a lavish dinner (which he oftenstop him.did), and let the plant foot the bill.

Even though this was often relatedto business, it was lavish and a waste.These banquets were often put onfor local cadres from surroundinggcommunes，and alsofor cadres whocamedown from above.1All this was for the purpose of building up goodguanxibecause cooperation was always necessary to do a plant's business.

Butalsothissometimes: was for private, completely personal reasons.

There were other irrational expenditures.Cadres who didn't reallyunderstand technical requirements, but who bought equipment which turned

This is bureaucratism--the making of blind ordersouttobeofnouse.before making a proper investigation and coming to a careful decision.There was wasteful expenditure in this respect also.

Another problem was that they didn't implement technical innovation (gexin)in an active way.They didn't: try hard to pull workers out of productionand put them to work trying to come up with innovationss that would saveon materials consumption, reduce costs, or increase the productivity ofequipment and labor.They had technical reform movements which wereeffective in accomplishingthis, but their leadership was too conservativeand didn't run these things seriously enough, and didn't implement theresults when they did do this.

Thesegroups were good because technicianshad theoretical knowledge and workers:had practicalexperience.But the

They didn't supportleaders in his plant didn't dare make full use of them.themandweren'twillingtoaallocate funds and implement new innovations.They ran the movements for technical reform and had these 'triple combina-tion'groups, because the upper levels expected it.But they did not really

Another problem was labor productivity.support the groups fully.

Workerswould put in 8 hours but only do 5 hours of real work.:Lack of workeractivism was another problem.

If there was material or equip-

Supply Problems and theirsolutions:ment they needed but could not get through the state plan, the plant used

-5-personall ganqing (siren ganqing), and traded cement for other materialsor machinery. There was no other way to do things, otherwise they couldn'tget production finished. · They would go to other factories to get equip-'ment, to forestry communes for wood. This was the way they got thingsdone.This was called materials exchange(wuzi jiaohuan).

There were other ways to complete the plan while using outside-the-plan measures.  One common way was to mobilize workers to work l2 insteadof eight hours， or work on Sundays.There was no overtime pay and laborwas thus not figured into costs.

This was called "using labor in placeof production".

The upper levels do not know about the use of these two methods inmost cases.  But sometimes they do know.  In such cases they usuallywill just ignore the practice because the practice is necessary to completethe plan.  They might criticize you for using illegal practices if itcomes to their attention.

Unless there is a large, obvious shipment ofcement for a backdoor deal involved in an exchange, so large that themasses and everyone knows what is going on, the upper levels are usuallykept in the dark.Candy Factory, 1968-70

They had a revolutionary committee, and also combined a lot of staffdepartments into three big groups--production, political work, administration.But in reality there were still old department staff doing the wcrk, soit was largely a change in name.In this plant there were few former cadresdoing manual labor in the shops.All this was largelya change in name.

The head of the revolutionary committee was an old cadre, the previousplant director.The vice-heads were an old cadre and a leader of a rebelfaction.The.rest of the standing committee members were members of mass

Mostofthemembersofthestandingcommitteeorganizations or old cadres.were party members. but a few mass representatives were not. TThe head ofthe RC was also tthe branch party secretary.When he was in this planttheirPartyrorganization was still intact.They had a PLA representativein the plant. He was not a member of the RC but he in fact held power.All decisions had to go through him.He did not leave until after theinformant left the plant.

The work of the production leadership group was basically the same asthat of the production department in his other plant.He was the solevice-head of this group.

Theworkwasthesame,buttheyhaddifferentnames for positions.Factionalism

Yes, there was factionalism left over from the CR.The people rememberedwho was in which faction during the CR, and did not get along with one another.This took place both within the leadership and also between the massesand leaders. It came out in whether or not you cooperated in work, whetheror not you listened to suggestions.This gave rise to many differences ofopinion on many matters.It also came out in whether workers would listento ordres from a certain leader.1Finally, it came out in who you cooperated

Generally, it reducedwith, who was promoted to certain types of jobs.work efficiency andeffectiveness of leadership.

-6-

描述：

