id: e99b069d26
标题：Hong Kong Interviews: Informant No. 75
日期：1984-6-23,1984-6-25
是否是时间段：false
作者：Andrew G. Walder
来源：
标签：文章
书籍：Hong Kong Interviews: Informant No. 75
书籍作者：Andrew G. Walder

正文：
No。 75Background:(6/23/84，3 hrs)

He wassent down to thecountryside from Canton during the CR。Recruiters from urban factories came down to the countryside in thel970s to get new workers from among the sent-down youth。You had togo through the back door to get a job, or get one of the better ones.You either got someone in the city to pull strings with the factory onyour behalf, or you send gifts to the cadres in the commune。 Each brigadeand team had a quota of people they could nominate; they looked at biaoxianand had meetings to nominate them。

He worked as a skilledworker in the Canton bicycle factoryfrom1975 to 1982。He worked on the production line of a workshop the entiretime。There were over 2o0 people in his shop。AAfter one year he was putto work as a helper in the shop office。1He handled production scheduling(diaodu, also translates as dispatching)。HHe handled the flow of produc-tion, the flow of materials and tools, inspection of the quality of theproducts。TThis was a full-time job。He was still a worker, in factwasaworkerinn grade the whole time.They neededmorehelpintheofficeand he got along well personallyywith the shop director。This was fulltime office work.

There were several cadres, but not all had a cadre grade。Theyhadan assistant shop head, and 5 da yuan: shenghuo, cailiao, diaodu tongji,jishu, chengben, and the party secretary。He was a diaodu tongji yuan.Theydid all of the management。Theywerenot necessarilyIofcadregrade。This was yi gong dai gan.Why do people want to do this?Conditionswerebetter, you don't work swing shifts, so its better work.Other peoplewere promotedbecausesomeone pulledsstrings for them with the upperlevels。It was a difficult job, big responsibility， came early， leftlate, always had to advise shop directors on the spot, and had to runaround all day to make sure that all things were coordinated。Sometimeshad to run to the warehouse to get things.Benefits

They had sick leave with pay, they had a meal hall, and served mealsto all three shifts for only 20 cents。In l980 they built a cantingin the factory, where workers could come and yum cha and order betterfood for 50 cents per dish tops。‘The earlier fantang was really verybasic。The factory opened the canting up as a service business to makemoney。It was open1 to the public too, and the factory had a wall facingthe street where it was.The workers inthecanting werethechildrenof workers being given jobs while temporarily awaiting assignments。Theycould also get these jobs through the back door。I got my younger brothera job here.

They also had buses to drive workers to the train station.TTheyalsogave them food fees for evening work, 20 cents and then later after 1980changed to 40 cents。  The factory also distributed things out at variousholidays. For example at the mid-autumn festival they gave out moon cakes.Thefactory supplied work clothes。They would give workers la rou atNewYear's。They had housing that was very inexpensive,both singledorms and family apartments.But they didn't have many tto passout.

Ifyou didn't live in the factory, they gave you a housing subsidyIofafewyuan per month.(Only about 15 to 20 percent lived in housing at the factory.Later in the 1980s they built more, so now about 30 percent or so live there.

(2)It is very hard to get housing, and they did have a back door。Theyalso had a factoryclinic with a doctor, but he was not a fullyqualified doctor.They distributed coupons6 for bicycles，washingmachines,electric fans; you can use guanxiitogetthem。

Theyhadanumberofformalconditionsbuttheywerenotalwaysused in getting these things。You could also go through the back door withthe head of the housing office, by giving him things as gifts。 But ifyou aretoofar awayfrom the formal qualifications then there is aproblem because others will raise objections.WageReadjustmentsafter1977

First there were lines specifying grades and seniority.Then themasses assessed。 But not all who qualified got them, because too manyqualified。 So many said getting a raise depended on fate and luck。Itdepended also on your popularity and relations with the masses after that.People got jealous if someone entered the same year as them but gothigher pay. Things were done basically the same way in 1979-80.

Yes, there were arguments over the assessments. Small groups ateach level were organized to assess and narrow down the lists。Themasses raised names in groups。They almost always nominated the unionyuan and shenghuo yuan (activist positions), and they almost alwaysgot it。 The problem is that the people who don't get the raise feelbad and don't like working for a couple of months.TThere are no scientificmethods of evaluation, it is all pingbi。 None of these new methodswere used in his factory through l982。 But enlarged powers enterprisesuse a new method of readjusting the wages of their own workers each yearout of their profitsretained。Twotenthsofonepercentoftheworkerscan be given raises annually this way..

They talked about tests and did implement them to some,but it didnot have a great impact on the evaluations for raises.Bonuses

This depended on the profits of the plant as a whole。More bonuses,

Shops were evaluated according to the 8 bigg targets.moreprofits。They used a point system to figure the performance of each shop。Thetotal points out of loothat were actually awarded toeachshop weretotaled uppfor the whole plant，and divided into the bonus funds forthe whole plant that month。That would determine how big the bonuseswould be for the shops.1But then the groups still held group assessmentsbased on the pingbi method,they still gave most peopleegrade 1 or 2,and very few got none。Theystill usedthe rotation system where theytook turns getting larger bonuses。They still haven't solved theproblem of egalitarianism.

Theydidhaveanewmethodofautomatically1reducingbonusesif youdidn't meet the target.But they still don't dare touch the basic wage.They can't really do it because it would affect worker livelihood. Thecriteria for bonusesin groups:tthe most important is still attendance.Its too embarrassingin groups to assess other aspects。1Formally,thecriteria are output, attendance, quality, and work attitude。Butinreality they can't assess well.in groups，because of the problem offace.There are no longer any real political criteria.They don't reallydiscuss biaoxian and political thought anymore.‘Therewasverylittle

(3)political study after the Gang of 4.There was only lz hours after workon wednesday, used to read documents in the shop.

Before1977theyhad3 nights of group study every week.

They tried to keep the staff bonuses smaller than the workers'，that

It was mainly according to their attendancewass the first principle.because thereeis no objective wayto measure theirperformance.Forworkersin the shops, each shop was graded on the loo point system accor-ding to their output, quality, attandance, clean production, safety andaccidentrecord。So each of these is considered in evaluating the shop.Add up all the points together, divide into teh bonus funds for thewhole factory, and that is what each shop gets.But theydidn't use thepoint system within the shops for groups and individuals.They still eatout of the same pot. You can't use a point system there because it istoo difficult and complex to manage。It takes up too much of our time.Alsoour productiontechnologydidnot allowustocalculatepreciselyfor eachindividual.

Within the shops there was still the 3 grade pingbi system。Gradeone is the most numerous, grade three the smallest,and only about 10percent or so don't get any bonus。lPeople only havebonusestakenaway for poor attendance or failing to meet quotas。The problem withassessmentsisthatpeopledon'twanttoembarrassoneanotherinthegroup assessments.

How could they run this better?Its hard togive a full answer ina short time。The whole system needs to be·reformed,not just the techniques.Floting wages has its advantages. But you can't have too great a changeall at once.You might create contradictions between the higher and lowerpaid at first.

Some workers are now taking a lot of sick leave to engage in sidelinebusiness, and they don't care about losing the bonus.Youcanmakemuchmore money on small businesses selling and buying Hong Kong goods, orbuying agricultural products from the peasants to sell in the city.

Ortheywill1 go work in a commune factory,where in some cases they canmakeeup to 200 yuan a month，sometimes 300.9So state workers take longterm sick leave, and earn all this money while still collecting sick pay.The ruralfactoriescan paya lotof moneybecausethere arenotsuch

It is very easy to buythingsinstrict financial regulations for them.Shenzhen and then sell them for higher prices in Canton.

Hisfactory was an expanded powers factory. So the factory (directordid have the power to fire workers after l980。 He didn't use it until1982,but I hear from friends still there that they used it in l983to fire a few who didn't come to work for a long time.Coupons

The factory gets them from different organs and

Industrial coupons.keeps some of them to）do business with。He givesthe example of the useof a TV coupon needed to borrow a truck from another factory。 These arecouponsfor specific items, not to be confused with the generic industrialcoupons that you use for things like cloth and matches. Part of them arekept and1given to workers who are on waiting lists。Then there are dis-tributions according to guanxi in shops.You canask the groupleaderdirectly, or even the factory director iff you know them well and are close.You can also trade one kind of coupon for another。You can trade withworkers in another factory.So you can get coupons from another factorytoo。But some factories actually sell these coupons and that is not legal.Sometimes workers argue about this fiercely among themselves.Thereare

(4)very1few coupons。

But this is beginning to fade into history。 In my city some goodsnow don't require coupons.In Canton, for example, bicycles and TVs are

Its coming to the point where if you have the money,much more plentiful.you can get anything.(Coupons are still used to get the better qualitythings, though, even to this day.Activists

(6/25/84, 3 hrs)

They still have activists，but not like before。Now you must begood at your work, you can't:just use your speaking ability to become onenow.Activistsdon'tget promoted into cadre positions anymore。Theyhave to have some ability for the job。But this is the policy。At basiclevels they don't really do things this way.They saidtheyweretochoose according to ability，but in realitythey choose people becauseof personal familiarity.Worker Performance

Of course there was a very big impact of the new wage policies。These are good economic policies, but they have been implemented poorly.They did not assess according to actual work performance and ability.But because the bonus money is not a lot， it is not that helpful to workers.The pingbi method is not rational。 Workers can't assess each otherhonestly in groups because of face。People not willing tospeak franklyin front of others。 So they used the "drawinglines" method to preventproblems, but that has no relation to how hard ppeople work.

In wage readjustments they had the same problem.Sometimes theyassessed according to year lines， sometimes real work, but also sometimessiren ganqing was the real criterion。FPeople ended up arguing when itcame time for readjustments, because of the irrationality of the criteria.You hadassessmentsandpeople withthesamequalificationsdidn'talwaysget the same treatment; and the amount to get them was limited。((Implication:a zero-sum game stimulating conflict）TThe cadres are really handling thereadjustments in each unit, a small leading group at each level。?Theydon't alwayshaveadeepunderstanding of the real purpose of the read-justmentss (ie, to stimulate worker productivity)。

No, you can't really say that the readjustments and new wage policyhas succeeded.  In factinmany factories the result has been the opposite.

1many factories the result has been the opposite.The amount of the raise issreally not that much，so.if you get the moneyit does not greatly influence your living standards。 BBut if you don'tget it, you will be even more unhappy.A floating wages system wouldbe more effective than a grade system.But it probably would create acontradiction between the older and younger workers。Theolderoneshavemore experience and skill and they would be more unhappy.

Workers of course were unhappy with their wages in l975。Buttheystill 2re, or at least a good number are。1First is the problem mentionedabove.Secondisthatthe privatebusinesspeoplearemakingalotmorethan they. And the third is that prices are rising very quickly.Yes,prices are stable for certain staple commodities, but. other goods are risingvery fast, like eggs, vegetables, cigarettes, chicken, etc.

Theofficialfigures don't really reflect this.Alsoyou have a problem of qualityfallingwhile the price remains the same.TThis is also a kind of inflation.1IknowChina's statistical system well, having worked as a factory statistician.They want to report good,not bad things， so often the statistics understate

(5)the realextent ofthe pricerises。

Despite all these problems, worker performance has still improved.But it improves in direct response to the size of the bonuses。Forawhile in our factory the biggest bonus was 5 yuan,but later it was20 yuan and in this situation they worked much harder。Youalsohaveto consider whether workers are more active just to get bonuses orbecause of an increased sense of morale and responsibility on the job.(Implication:in this sense things have not improved)。Workers Education

Most large and medium sized factories and companies are now running'workers colleges' that are equivalent to technical middle schools.Moststudents are our own factory's workers。After they graduate, they becomeassistanttechnicians。Theleadersselectthebestworkerstoattendthesecourses。(Of course personal relations enter into these selections.Theydid have these before--the July 2l Universities that Mao suggested。So itsnot allthat new.But they are really sressing this now。Theseuniversitiesdon'tgivethatgoodofaneducation。Theteachersarejustordinarycadres, and the classroom materials aren't that good。I often met theteachers and students of this school and they were critical of the lackof emphasis and support for the school.LeadingGroupoChanges

They did do this after 1976。 1Most plant and department cadres attendedxuexi ban。 They stopped work and all studied together.After studythey were transfered all over。 The bad were sent to bad units, the goodsent to better units or were promoted to better jobs。They studied thepolicies and tried to get them to unite behind the new policies, "unifyingthe thinking""ofcadres。Told them why they were carrying out the changes.They had speeches, read reports and editorials, and discussed them.

Our:ownfactory:peoplegenerallywere promotedordemotedwithinthesamefactory after they came back。Now factory directors have thepower to appoint their own vice-directors and dept。 heads.'This is takingaway some of the powers of the old personnel and organization depts。iInthe factory ttheyy promoted a couple of department heads to be: vice-directors,and demoted some to the shop offices。Factory directors did not change, butthey changed party secretaries several times.Shop Organization

They had a branch secretary and vice secretary in the shop.?Theyhandled the CYL,Union work and in every campaign they were in command butthey generally didn't bother with production.They trainded and preparednew members.and maintained party's6 organizational life。The youth leaguewere young workers under 25.They organized after hours recreationsactivities like swimming, and study.AAbout 30percent of the young workerswere members.Why so few?  They limited the membership.They studied oneevening after the shift a week for 'organizational life',they would alsodo special volunteer work after hours, discuss problems with the shopscretary， etc。Would engage in volunteer labor and engage in productioncompetition. They would also take part in athletic activities.

Before l977 they hada strictentrance requirement:you had to havegood chushen and historical background, be a certain age, and be activein political study and good biaoxian.

Therequirementsarethesamenow

(6)as before, perhaps only a bit less strict with regard to class backgroundand historical background.I don't think there is much use in joiningthe youth league。The benefits are not all that clear。The main oneis that you can become a party member，and this is important for promotionlater on. To be the head of the shop or department you must be a partymember.(Other thanthat there are nospecialadvantages。

Relations between masses and activists:I heard that relations wereall right in the l950s， because the league and the party did a good job.But the quality of the membership went down after that.1Now it doesn'tsound good to say you are in the youth league. Many people now call itthe laji tuan (garbage league).There is some abuse of the young membersby the young workers， just like in school，but not a lot。An example:Sometimes they ask for blood donations。Chinese hate doing this，becausethey think it takes away your soul.The workers willturntothe leaguemembers and say, "You give blood, you'rethe league member!"

Activists and youth leaguers are not exactlythesamethingbecausethere are some activists who are too old for the youth league。There are

the political activists and backbones duringtwo kinds of activists:campaigns, and those who are activists in production。The first kind arenot reallyconsidered genuine activists by the masses，they are actuallydespised (mieshi)。But the second kind are considered real activists ,they don't rely on their mouth to eat。 In recent years the second kindof activist is more common。ShopOrganization

Attendance checking--leaves, both medical and personal, the timespeople come in and leave.1No time clocks。 Handled by the small groups。But time checkingis not too tight,its easy to come late and leave early.People also leave in the middle of the day。The group leader knows this,but covers it up and doesn't report it。Why?EBecause he does not wantbad relations in the group， doesn't want other workers to oppose him inassessments for raises, and doesn't wantthem to oppose him。Thiswouldjust make things difficult in the shop。If the problem is so serious thatit affects production, then the group） leader will report it， but mostlikely he first of all will tell the worker involved and warn him first.But because group leaders are also workers,they would rather not enforcerules so strictly that conflicts arise.。As61onggastheycancontinueetoget by, they will let it slide.

For a period at the end of the CR they said that systems of rules andregulations fettered worker activism.Since 1977 or 78 they have revivedthem。The job responsibility system (gangwei zeren zhi).TThis is the systemthatwasrestored。The systemsof jobresponsibilityarespecifiedfor

They have restored its name and put up）lists，buteach job on the floor.no one really checks on its implementation.It has some effect, but notaverylarge one。It does helpon a daily basis to tell who is responsiblefor a mistake onithe floor,it also tells people how they are to handle theirjob。They did not have any concrete activity like study groups to implement

Theythese regulations.They posted them on a board and that was about it.diditbecausetheabovelevels said that they had to spelloutthesystem

But they didn'tgive much thought to it otherwise.of job responsibilities.

Reports (baobiao):production reports every day, go to the productiondepartment, and every month they had a report on the progress in meetingthe eight big targets, and also attendance and labor reports.They were all

(7)sent to the factory office, which reported to the above levels。 Theyaso had a huibao system。 Every week the shop director met with the leadingcadres and department heads about production progress and problems.

They also recently started a lingliao dan system. The groups filledout reports, they also had yuan responsible for production planning andstatistics, etc。 I would add them all up and give a copy7to the shop head,keep one, and give one to the production department。 The problem is thatI have no way of knowing about the accuracy of the statistics on targetfulfillment。 1Materials waste is another problem caused by poor records. Thehop bad 4-5 quality inspectors; they would find quality problems and tellgroup and shop when there was a problem.  The big problem is that we hadproduction line technology so it is hard to verify the statistics of eachgroup because the material keeps moving.

The shop itself had two storerooms:one for tools and equipment,andone for finished products。But the materials were kept at the factory'swarehouse.Quotas and Bonuses

Some workers got a quota overfulfillment bonus: it depends on whetherto tools permit calculation of individual output。Othersareonathreegrade bonus assessment system. The younger workers like the ping jiangsystem because they have poor sense of responsibility. Older workerslike the chao'e jiang because they know how to work:  Workers generallyprefer the hard criteria, as long as the quotas are reasonable。‘Theyusethe method of average worker output to figure the quotas。Everyyearthey revise them but not very scientifically or exactly。?Theyarefairlyconservative about it。 If you raise quotas you have to think about theworkers' reaction。So you can't raise them too much。They usually set themjust a little higher each year。Iftheplant setsthem toohighitcreates difficulty for the shop director too; he has higher targets andhas to push workers harder, may use overtime work and possibly a drop inquality.TThis is the reason they are a bit conservative。. They aren'treally afraid of workers, they are just conservative.

描述：

