id: f4fbdf49db
标题：Hong Kong Interviews: Informant No. 137
日期：1990-5-11
是否是时间段：false
作者：Andrew G. Walder
来源：
标签：文章
书籍：Hong Kong Interviews: Informant No. 137
书籍作者：Andrew G. Walder

正文：
No.137

1No.137（Cambridge)Background（5/11/90,3.5hrs.)

Interview with a worker on the production line,making transistors in a Beijingelectrical components factory that employs 1400 people.The informant left Beijing inMarch 1990 on an immigrant visa,and worked there until shortly before his departure.He is 32,a high school graduate,who worked for 12 years in the same factory,doing2two year apprenticeship, studying part-time for 3 years in a TV university in the mid-21980s.Wages

When he began work in 1977,he drew an apprentice wage of 20+ yuan.Wageswere low, but prices were too in those days,he says. After two years, he became a #1worker at 34 yuan. In all,he has gotten 4 raises since then,each time a raise of 1grade according to state regulated wage readjustments. In the beginning, seniority andwage level were the most important standards,in the early readjustment they allowed40% to get raises of one grade each time if they qualified.SSince 1988,theyhave giventwo general wage raises of one grade to all workers in his factory.This was becauseprices.were rising so fast. They also started to give fushi butie of 7.5 yuan per month toeverybody in the factory in 1987 or 1988, for the same reason,when inflation reallystarted to get serious.No,they didn't giveout any such supplementsbefore thenbecause inflation wasn't all that serious.

In 1979 and 1980 he made 34 yuan,was raised to 40 yuan in 1981, 47 yuan in1984,and 56 yuan in 1986,when he became a grade 5 worker. In 1986 theybegantoemploy a floating wage（fudong gongzi) system.Floating wages in theory varybyfactoryprofit levels.After you complete your profit quota you can give out wages that arehigher than the wages fixed to your grade by the state regulations.You can give higherwages by one or two grades. In this factory, the floating wages were implementedgradually, they increased the salaries gradually above the regulated levels. It has yet togo down in any month. The chemical industry, he says, does not pay as high as others,like steel and chemicals (he has friends that work at Shougang, and elsewhere). By thebeginning of 1989, he was making the equivalent of grade 7 workers’wages, though hewas still grade 5 according to his dangan.His basic wage was 1ll yuan per monthwhen he left this year.Plants that do better can give higher wages than this.Everyonein his factory got a raise of one grade at the end of 1989. The main criterion hasalwayss been seniority.The number of raises given because of skill has always beensmall,only 1 to55percent of the total number ofraises granted each time.All of this isdone in accordance with regulations from above.lIf I left my unit,however,I would getwhatever they paid a grade 5 worker in my new unit, not what I was making when Ileft.

There are big differences between industries,but not between factories withinindustries.For example,Capital Steel workers at the same grade as him get 3-400 yuanper month. Also chemicals and machine building get much higher wages.Electronicsindustry pay is low. The differences are very big.The state tried to regulate this,butmany factories get special treatment.Tax rates on steel plants profits are lower than inour industry;20% versus 60%.

Yes,they did make workers buy government savings bonds (guojia zhaijuan) last

No.137

2year.But they did that every year after 1983 in our factory.You had no choice.Theyjust deducted the amount from your paycheck and gave you bonds instead.5 year bondsata totalcompounded interestrateof13.2%over theentirelifeofthebond.Thestategave quotas to each factory for this. Sometimes factories used their own money to buysome;others justmade workers buytthem.Last October in our factory,every worker inthefactoryhad totake4o%of theirmonthlysalaryinbonds.Justonce.Differentlevels in different factories. I got 60 yuan worth. Interest is higher than in the bank,butworkersdon't like this becausewith inflation they'llbewortha lot less in thefuture.We don't like it but mei banfa.We didn't worry about it too much because ourwages were still going up fast.Bonuses

When he began work, there were no bonuses. Only basic wages and overtime.Sometimes they gave out things like chickens and fish as rewards at the end of the year,also shirts, pants,cotton cloth.

Now the floating wages are the basic wage; but we still have bonuses, though notlarge. These are according to the factory's performance, the manager has the power toset them.About 15 yuan per month,paid out at 45 yuan each quarter the last year orso.

We also had year end bonuses. Last year, end of 1989, got 200 yuan. Equal foreveryone,except ifyou are absentmore than 4 days per month,no bonus at all.48days for the entire year.Our bonuses were considered small in Beijing.Wagesarehigher at Capital Steel because their bonuses are much higher, not their basic wage.

There are also bonuses called gangwei jintie.Leaders get these.In reality theseare bonuses.The plant director5 got 50 yuan a month.Shop director 30 yuan.Allworkers know about this. They also get bonuses that are higher than workers. Shopdirectors get 1.7 times the basic bonus for workers,the plant director 2.2 times.Thereare big differences in wages and bonuses now within the factory.There are smallerdifferences between shops too; some get more if their efficiency issmore,like 1.1 or 1.2times the basic.1.o is the jiben jiang for all, then it may rise for others who get largershares.Cadres have the power to decide these bonuses,after they go through thecongress of workers and staff (zhidai hui).

The zhidaihui is not really representative.Its just like the national people'scongress.Workers elect usually the older workers.There are also a lot of middle levelcadres in it. Its an empty shell (kong jiazi). Workers still don't really dare raise seriousyijian. Still they are a little afraid of cadres. Workers do complain sometimes, but itsnot much use.Punishments (Service Company)

They can still give you small shoes to wear, like in the 1970s. The main methodis to give you a worse job assignment, one that's harder or busier. Another punishmentfor workers who give problems is to transfer them to the service company (fuwu gongsi).All the shop director has to do is say that he no longer wants to employ (pinren) you,and you go to the service company. Too many workers? They send you there and yourwages are no longer guaranteed. If they don't have work for you to do, you go homeand get 60 percent of your basic wage and no bonuses. Some people do like this,but formany its a punishment.

The service company does anything that can earn money,like babysitting in

No.137

3foreign embassies, or doing getihu type of private business buying and selling on thestreets.One way is to sign a contract with the company to turn over a certain amountin profit every month,they give you the initial investment in return and help youarrange places to buy the goods.The factory uses this to get excessive personnel off ofthe payroll and save money,and also to get rid of troublesome workers.Abouthalfofthe 200 or so people in the service company went there voluntarily; they all came fromregular jobs in the plant. Some went voluntarily because they thought they might makemore money;but the rest were sent to savemoney or aspunishment

Therearealsoworkerswhotakeleaveanddgo off to dobusinesson their own.They don't do this with a doctors'certificate anymore.They just agree with the servicecompany to turn over a certain amountofmoney every month,and then they get inreturn the basic wage, insurance, and so forth. Its not so easy to get sick leavecertificatesas before.The relations between the factory and the contractinghospitals arenow tight and that kind of thing is very rare now.Outside Income

Some people with ability also have businesses on the side to earn more money.They sell vegetables, cigarettes.They just buy and sell. Can't earn much doing thatthough. Its not easy to find outside work using your skills, like repairing electricalappliances.Usually you have to go through the unit to do this.

For example, we found a job building a computer for a research institute. We gotpermission from our unit to work on this after hours. The computer cost 20,oo0 yuan inall. After the shift, we worked on it. The factory gave us equipment and parts. Thefactory got 18,000 yuan, we only got 2000 to split up among 10 of us. That came to 200yuan apiece for a month and a half of work. This kind of opportunity is still rare.

There areworkers who justquit their jobs to become getihu.Especially in 1987and 1988,this became more common.I knew 5 or 6 who did this in my unit.Theydidit forthemoney.Those who were confident about their ability tomake money didn'tworry about losing their benefits.They can make 1ooo yuan a month often,this is notuncommon.Mostly from buying and selling, touji daoba.WecallthemdaoyeorxiaodaoEverything you can imagine is bought and resold these days, like train tickets. Thesedays everyone is looking for an opportunity to make money after work, but its not easy.

Changing jobs is still hard. Too many workers all over.Other units don'twantmore.If you have skills, your unit won't let you go.They have rencai jiaoliu zhongxinnow.This is run by the Beijing labor bureau, who provides introductions to new units.If your unit lets you go, you transfer your dang'an to the center, and try to get anintroduction to a new work unit.Benefits

Our unit doesn't have much housing, like Capital Steel. Only 70 apartments builtby the unit.But if a worker gets a factory apartment the unit can distribute theapartment he vacates. Its very difficult for young workers in their 3Os to getapartments.Its basically impossible to move to a larger apartment if you have one..Ilived with my parents,because I'm not married.Some buy their own apartments now,but it is reallymuch too expensive for workers.But grandparents sometimes buy fortheir grandchildren.A two bedroom apartment with kitchen and bathroom,50 squaremeters,will cost about 120,000 yuan in Beijing now.

No. 137

5

We had a housing committee (fenfang weiyuanhui). Representatives from eachshop; leaders, people like representatives to workers’ congress. They set up a pointsystem.The committee was temporary,only set up when there were apartments todistribute. They considered your current housing situation (square meters per person),whether you had 3 generations under one roof, whether your spouse had a unit to gethousing from, your seniority, whether both spouses worked in unit, what your position is(leaders get more, of course).

These are the criteria for comparing and balancing.Points are given for eachthing. There is no possibility to get housing from the city. Only your unit--unless thecity takes the land from where you are currently living.That wayyou can getnewhousing from the city. The last building they built in our unit, most of the apartmentswent to middle ranking cadres; their seniority is usually highest anyway.Of courseworkers have an opinion about this, especially those who also have high seniority anddidn't get it.

The final decision is made by the plant director's office,either the director himselfor one of the 4 vice-directors.So complaints go directly to their office.One woman,over 50,complained1oudlylasttime.Shewent to thedirector'soffice tocomplain andask why the decision wasmade that way.She cried and yelled,stressed her difficulthousing situation and long seniority. The director gave in a bit and gave her an oldapartment,one of the ones the peoplee getting new apartments were moving out of.Usuallycadreswillgive inabit if the personreallyhasa seriousproblem.

Your relations with others will influence whether you get housing. Its really notreasonable. if everyone hates you, and the people on the committee don't like you, youjust don't have much chance.Cadre bias also can affect this.

Housing is the biggest problem,it oes affect work from time to time. Better workunits have made the housing situation better for their workers in the 1980s,but the oneslike ours really haven't been able to. We still have the iron rice bowl, despite what theysay in the papers. We still have xiaoji daigong. No real difference whether you workhard or not.Living Standards,Work Units

A lot of workers want to leave the unit, but its very hard to get a new unit. Tobe a getihu,you have to be out of work.Otherwise you can't get a business license fromthe bureau of industry and commerce,and you can't do business.You also have to havesome savings enough to get started;workers don't usually have this much.There is alsorisk.Also, you have to think about medical insurance, housing (you have to leave unithousing if you quit), pension. So its rare and difficult for wor5kers to become getihu.But there are. some, mostly young, who have left the unit to do this. A couple of them Iknow have done really well, saving over 10,000 yuan.

Generally,a middle-aged worker is doing well if he's saved 1oo0 yuan.A colorTV is. 3000 yuan, a small refrigerator 2000, a washing machine 500. A flying pigeonbicycle is around 2oo.Generally today if you have money, there is no problem at all tobuy the better consumer items.There were some shortages in the mid-1980s,but nowthere are plenty of high quality items around.

There are plenty of import items on the market now,he thinks because of theofficialprofiteering(guandao). Cadres are taking government money and setting upillegal import businesses. A lot of things are getting in this way. Also black market andspeculation is prevalent. Prices are going up fast on these items. A color TV was 1700

No.137

6yuan in 1986. Now its 3000. Now you can walk right into a department store and walkout with a Hitachi color TV, its that simple. Two years ago you couldn't do this.

Recently they reinstituted ration coupons for pork, eggs, sugar, soap, matches.This is in part because people from outside Beijing were coming in and buying thesethings up. In state stores, one jin of eggs costs 1.5-1.8 yuan. Its 2.5 on the free market.Prices for food have gone up a lot too,and that's where inflation is most pressing.Workersand1989Protests

A lot of workers supported the students,almost all sympathized with them,evenif they never went out on the streets. In our factory, production was not greatlyaffected.Workers thought that inflation was caused by corruption,and that if there wasmore democracy,there would be less corruption.That is why workers supported thestudents.The students'slogans appealed to them.

In our unit, workers didn't really participate until the newspapers and TV cameout to support the students.Then they really got involved.Workers then began tobecome active and took part more in the activities downtown.The cadres didn't knowwhat to do once the newspapers came out this way.Should they support the students ornot? After May 4, the newspapers changed, and they were not sure what to do. In ourunit they neither prevented people from going, nor encouraged them to go. They justsaid,“if you want to go,then go."

Most people in the factory,cadres included,really sympathized with the studentsaims.Our unit's mid-level cadres didn't sent workers out in trucks,though thishappened in other factories. In our unit, workers got together and talked, decided to gotogether to the square,took the trucks without asking for them (but cadres didn't punishthem for this).Cadres let them go because they weren't sure what to do.If they actedto prevent them,they might get in trouble later.Workers also collected donations in ourfactoryand thenwentofftotakethemoneytothesquare.About10percentof theworkers took part in an organized way in these activities.Mostwent on their own,either taking leave and going or going down after work or on days off.Most of us didthis.Other factories were not like us, but in our production was not greatly influenced.

Workers aren't like students.They aren't all that interested in ideas aboutdemocracy or politics.They had gone through the Cultural Revolution and they weren'tinterested in politics anymore.Workers have families,have worries.So the governmentcan generally count on them.

Two factors were very important: student slogans against corruption, whicheverybody hated,and concern over inflation. Second, the papers supported the studentsand TV too,that was also very important. Our attendance from mid-May to early Junewas 40-50% of normal.Not all who weren't there were participating in the movement.The bus lines weren't running so we found it difficult to get to work

Those who did come to work during this period spent much of their time talkingabout the movement.But we normally didn't have a lot of work lately anyway,so thedamage to production was not that great.

Workers didn't have any clear impression of leadership splits at the top.Itwasn't that clear to us. Mainly, we responded to the calls in the papers to support thestudents.After the papers changed their stance at the end of May,the cadres thendemanded that workers come back to work,and started to pass regulations to come backto work even if the buses weren't running.Generally,ifyou had a good reason for notcoming, it was ok.

No.137

During the movement,relations between the masses and cadres were very good;they became very polite, relations became closer than ever, because we all sympathizedwith the students and their demands. It wasn't like our normal everyday relations. Wehad a common language, common desires, there were no problems,we could solve anysmall conflicts easily.We got along.Aftermath

After the movement, everybody had 3 full days of political study, no work at all.We watched videos,listened to reports,raised our consciousness about thecounterrevolutionary riot, turned our thinking around.Workers didn't believe this,ofcourse not. This didn't change our thinking, though we didn't say anything. This is themajority,but there were some workers who from the beginning didn't support thestudents,though that the disorder would disrupt their lives.

After the political study for three days it was over.At least on the surface. Butin workers minds, their thinking was complicated because they still sympathized.Workers commonly grumble and make cynical remarks (guaihua) about the nationalleaders now. During the movement, workers liked to imitate the mannerisms and speechof Li Peng when he was meeting with the students on TV. He seemed so strangelooking,ill at ease and nervous.Li Peng is really disliked very much. Since June 4,wehavenot had any more political study,butnowwe have to listen to government reportsmore often than before.Workers Politics

Workers have higher standards of living than before,and this is due to the reformand opening, and they welcomed it.Our factory,for example,had plans for a jointventure with AmericanExpress to build an officebuilding and restaurant on factory landBut it may not come about now. But this kind of business is very advantageous to thefactories, because workers who can't be used in the factory can work in the building orrestaurant, and a lot of money goes to the factory to build housing and other things.There are a lot of joint ventures like this that involve land in Beijing right now.

Most workers don't understand what anti bourgeois liberalization isall about.And they aren't at all concerned about it. This is just in the intellectual realmWorkers talk about politics now among their friends; still sympathize with workerdemands,but its not the main part of their lives. If they still get their bonuses they willbe basically satisfied..They're mainly concerned about their families.

Nobody in the unit was arrested for political activities during the movement. Butlast year they did have a campaign against pornography (saohuang yundong). Againstpornography,prostitution,gambling,feudal superstitutions.There were no activities inthe unit,but in society therewere.Thepolice did arrest people from our unit forgambling then.They were educated and released.Also in our unit we had people whohad pornographic videotapes,copied them and passed them on.The police fined them ifthey found out.Did the same to fortune-tellers.

The supply of goods got better after June 4,because the governemtn tried veryhard to solve living problems of the citizens.Inflation has gotten a lot better now.Beginning early 1989, the banks started to raise interest rates on deposits to compensatefor high inflation (baozhi chuxu).

No.137

8Corruption

From around 1988 on,basic level cadres in the government became more andmore corrupt.For example,if you needed a business license,you'd have to pay them;policewould demand bribes for not reportingyou for things.Theyhave gotten to thepoint where these small officials ask openly for money. They demand it just for doingwhat they are paid to do.This is what people are really most upset about: they say youqian bu ru you quan.

This kind of thing is not that prevalent in buying and selling; its mainly amongsmall government officials.This kind of thing also occurs in work units,for example ingiving out apartments,yi quan mo si.

I ran into this myself in getting paperwork done to leave the country. I felt itnecessary to get a friend who knew someone in the office to go with me so I wouldn'thave to deal with it.Otherwise they would give me all kinds of trouble,make me fillout the form again and come back. Its more convenient this way, otherwise they giveyou a hard time.So your generally have to get someone who knows somebody to avoidthe problems and help you get things done.I ran into this kind of thing on a trip toCanton. I needed to get back to Beijing fast to leave the country before long. Couldn'tget a train ticket. Some guy in the host unit got a ticket for me, then when he gave itto me.he asked for some money for his trouble.

In the 1980s, the papers always said that workers living standards were gettingbetter every year, but in reality it hasn't risen that much. True, workers have TVs andother modern commodities now. But thats because all of society is developing, notbecause workers living standards are rising..Other than a fewmodernized commoditiesour lives haven't really gotten all that much better. But everybody's getting better off,not just workers,and some others are much better off than before.Workerssympathized with the student movement this time because their slogans represented theirtrue inner wishes. But I think workers will think carefully next time before supportingstudents openly again. June 4 was a big lesson that they will not want to repeat. Everymovement has given people lessons like this; next time we'll be more careful.

描述：

