id: c81fd23cbe
标题：The Case of Ji Rui Defacing the Glorious Portrait of the Leader
日期：1978-0-0
是否是时间段：false
作者：新疆维吾尔自治区高级人民法院
来源：西南政法学院刑法教研室, 冤假错案选编, 59-60
标签：文章
书籍：The Case of Ji Rui Defacing the Glorious Portrait of the Leader
书籍作者：新疆维吾尔自治区高级人民法院

正文：
# The Case of Ji Rui Defacing the Glorious Portrait of the Leader

Ji Rui, male, Han ethnicity, 30 years old, family background in office work in the old society, student class status, born in Huarong County in Hunan Province, previously employed as a carpenter at the Second Construction Engineering Company in Xinjiang Uyghur Autonomous Region.

On July 3, 1970, the Military Control Commission of the Public Security Bureau of Bayingolin Mongol Autonomous Prefecture declared Ji Rui guilty of being an active counter-revolutionary on the counts of “defacing the glorious portrait of the leader; spreading reactionary rhetoric; attacking the leading cadre of the central government; voicing grievances for the Liu [Shaoqi] Revisionist Clique,” and sentenced him to ten years of fixed-term imprisonment. After the judgment, Ji refused to accept [the decision] and constantly tried to appeal.

In 1974, the Intermediate People’s Court of Bayingolin Mongol Autonomous Prefecture conducted a review: Ji was originally convicted of “spreading reactionary rhetoric” because he shouted the slogan “down with all those in power” during the Cultural Revolution; [he was charged with] “attacking the leading cadre of the central government” because when Jiang Tong was caught somewhere, [Ji] mistakenly said it was Jiang Qing; [the charge of] “voicing grievances for the Liu Revisionist Clique” was because he said: “Looking back on the anti-revisionist debate, it was a time when Peng Zhen, Wu Xiuquan and others were quite renowned. To think that even such high-ranking officials could oppose the party really boggles the mind”; [he was charged with] “defacing the glorious portrait of the leader” because when he helped someone build a wooden box, he sawed in half a portrait of Chairman Mao drawn on a piece of plywood.

Based on this, the Intermediate Court of Bayingolin Mongol Autonomous Prefecture held that, even though Ji made mistakes, none of the counts except the one pertaining to “defacing the glorious portrait of the leader” constituted counter-revolutionary crimes. Hence it was ruled that: “The original verdict was not appropriate, the punishment was too harsh; although it constitutes a crime that Ji Rui defaced the great leader Chairman Mao’s portrait, it should not be punished as a counter-revolutionary act, [and thus] the original term of ten years fixed-term imprisonment should be shortened to four years, after release from which he should be assigned to a suitable position by his original work unit.” After the judgment, the original work unit considered Ji Rui a newly released prisoner, so they would not help him sort out problems with employment and rations. Ji Rui appealed again. In 1976, the Xinjiang Higher People’s Court ruled: “The Thirty-third xingzi judgment of the Intermediate People’s Court of the Bayingolin Mongol Autonomous Prefecture (74) is revoked. Ji Rui is acquitted and his verdict reversed.”

Selected from Cases, [published by] the Higher People’s Court of Xinjiang Uyghur Autonomous Region in 1978.

Translated by Jason Chu, Jan Miebach, Joanna Xu, Junyi Yang

描述：

