id: 89c27cd90c
标题：Hong Kong Interviews: Informant No. 15
日期：1980-2-13,1980-3-1,1980-3-7,1980-3-10,1980-3-24
是否是时间段：false
作者：Andrew G. Walder
来源：
标签：工业战线,文章
书籍：Hong Kong Interviews: Informant No. 15
书籍作者：Andrew G. Walder

正文：
INFORMANT NO. 15

PERSONAL DATAAge:47

Sex: MaleEducation:University graduate (machine building)

16Total Years Relevant Experience:Last Year of Relevant Experience: l977

Year Left China:1977Initial Immigration Status:  LegalNative Place/Overseas Connections: Guangdong native/oS relativesClass Background/Political Designation: 0S/Landlord-KMT (sister l957 rightist)

OCCUPATIONALHISTORYSUMMARYPositions Held: l) Fushun Petroleum Machinery Plant, Liaoning, 1962-77

a) Staff technician, Technical Department, 1962-63b) 'borrowed' by Industrial Department of Petroleum

Ministry, Peking, to work on Ministry Standards

Handbook, 1963-65c）Staff technician, Technical Department, 1965-68d)shop worker, 1968-69e)sStaff technician, Technical Group, 1969-70f）'borrowed' by Fushun Municipal Planning Commission,

Staff work, 1970-71

g) Staff technician, Technical Department, l972-77Administrative Level of Work Unit/(No. of employees):

1) Ministry until 1970s, then Municipal/(2600)Experience in Full-time Manual Labor (for non-worker occupations):

shop worker, 1968-69APPOINTMENTS:  5

TOTAL HOURS: 11

PAGES TEXT:13No.15Occupational History

(2/13/80, 2.25 hrs.)

The informant worked in a centrally-administered petroleum machineryplant, under the Petroleum and Petrochemical Ministry (shiyou huagong bu).His enterprise employed 2600 people. 1He was an engineer in the technical

After middle school in Guangdong, he tested into Universitydepartment.at Dalian, Liaoning province.He entered in 1957 and graduated in 1962 fromDalian Industrial College (Dalian Gongxue Yuan).  He studied machine building,afive year course.After graduation, he was assigned to the Fushun Petroleum

AfteroneMachinery Plant in Liaoningaas a practicing (jianxi) technician.year, he was made into a regular technician. In l963 he was 'borrowed' (jieyong)by the Industrial Department (gongchang chu) of the Ministry in Peking.1Hewas still attached to the plant in a formal sense.

They needed people in Pekingthat knew technology. and they were short of staff.

So they borrowed a fewpeople from each plant under them.They worked at compiling product standardsfor publication in the Ministry's standards handbook (bu ban biaozhun-- R

）. This was the first standards handbook for the 'ministry.颁标佳since it was only established around l956 after the discovery of Daqing.Previously, they only had oil fields in Yumen and xinjiang, and it was onlya bureau (ju).In l965, after the completion of the standards handbook, hereturned to the technical department as an ergineer and worked at productdesigning.He drew up designs for new products, which were sent to shopsfor preduction.

In l968, during the Cultural Revolution 'xiafang' of cadres, hewas sent to shops for manual labor.The Revolutionary Committee was establishedin October 1968, and finally in 1969 he was transfered back to the technicaldepartment withoneother engineer tododesigningwork again.In 1970, fromthe last half of the year to the first half of l97l, he worked, aagain ona 'borrowed' basis, at the Fushun Municipal Planning Commission(jihua weiyuanhui).This was the generalleading bodyfor allcity-runindustries.

He did bothoffice work and travelled around.to various plants on inspection.

In l972, because he had overseas relations in the US and Hong Kong,and because he had a bad class background (landlord-KMr), he went backto his factory. He was in close with the Chairman of the Planning Commission,who was also a vice-Mayor (fu shizhang), and he wasn't really willing tohave the informant transfer back to his plant, since he did good work.1ButIfigured that if he stayed in such a high position, before long he wouldbe dragged out when the next movement came. Political requirements were verystrict at that high level. So he used the opportunityofhisplantdirector!srequest to go back to his old job.So he went back to his old unit from l972-77,and once again worked in the technical department.His job was to check overthe designs of the younger designers in the department.He did this until heleft in 1977.Wagesand Promotions

(3/1/80, 2 hrs.)

In October 1962, after graduation from college, he started work.He was a practicing technician (jianxi jishuyuan), equivalent to grade 14,at 46¥. After one year he became a formal technician.This was automaticallydone unless one madee a seriuos political mistake.They all wrote "practicumreports" (shixi baogao) about what they had learned during their year.In1963 hetherefore became a gradee3f technician, 55. In l963 they also hada general raise for workers and staff in the country. After that there werenone.They allowed raises for 60% of the workers, 40% of the technical cadres;and 35% of the administrative cadres in Fushun City.The evaluations were

-1-石油化工

( -> /96了)1管理局

供应局S

?(基建,烧油)地质队 )

一(四川新疆

一等油田)

工厂彪

虚虚1)抚顺石迪机戒()2)南阳木几木双一3）宝鸡弟一机戒厂4)面安仪表厂5)主鸡管厂6)济南浆油机广

(196了-71石油工业阝

阝(北京)

7

11

1

?

石油管理局一

供应局[虐1机械厂焕油司虚

人事司处基建司

油

田开发司

1虚、、

H油—

B嫩油）carried out according to several criteria: l) previous low wages, 2) workperformance, 3) political performance, which meant relations with coworkerand relations with leaders--guanxi was very important, and 4) class background.In his department they held meetings, decided how many (according to thefixed proportion) could get nominated. TThen they discussed, appraised,

But in the last analysisand made sure people agreed with the selection.it was thedepartment headwhodecided.The key factor was the decisionof the leader of the unit involved--department or production group.Informant received no raises until he left in l977, despite his varioustransfers and promotions.

Around l972 or l973 (before the criticism of Lin Biao and Confucius)there was a readjustment based on years of service and wage grade.It wasdecidedthat all whoworkedcontinuously in the. plant from before l956 wouldbe raised to grade 4, and a small percentage would be raised only to grade 3.Those who entered between 1956 and 1958, but were still at grade l or 2, wouldbe raised to grade 3.Those who entered between l958 and 1964 who were stil1grade l, would be raised to grade 2.

Wage Scales::Administrativeecadre scales went from 24 up to grade l.

Workers went from l upTechnical cadres went from grade l6 up to grade l.to grade 8. The workers'wagespreadwentasfollows:1）34¥，2）40¥，3）47¥，4）56¥，5） @67¥，6) 70+¥，7） @90￥，8） 108¥.The vast majority of workerswere in grade 2.Everyone became grade 2 after going through their apprentice-ship. This was for skilled workers. .But they also had mine workers (kuang gong),whose wages on the 8 grade scale were somewhat higher.

They also had construc-tion workers (jianzhu gong), who were also a bit higher at each grade.rhey also had service workers (fuwu gong), like cooks, ditch diggers, etc., whomade a little less at each grade.(Generally speaking, in a factory the vastmajority are 'skilled' workers.Therearealsosupplementsforsteelfurnaceworkers and for other types of hard labor of less than l¥ per day.

The highest engineers, grades l,2, and 3, made

Technical Cadres:360, 280， and 240 ￥ respectively.The lowest engineer, grade 10, made l06¥.Regular Technicians, grades 1l,l2,l3, made 99, 87, and 55 respectively.Practicing technicians and assistant technicians were put at grade l4, at46¥, while assistant technicians were put at grades l5 and l6 at 42 and 37¥.Assistant technicians graduated from middle-level technical schools (zhong zhuan).This is an alternative to the normal middle school degree. . The'practicing'technicians (jianxi) had just graduated from technical university or industrialcollege.

How to get promoted?First there is work output, ability, but relations(guanxi) with leaders and coworkers is very important.The highest wagegradesfor technical personnel were reserved for pre-l956 graduates who had beenworking continuously since then.But in effect, post-l956 graduates who hadworkedcontinuously1could not get raised above grade lo.There was a de factolimit. 'worker engineers' were not technical cadres but old, experiencedworkers with little education but with good knowledge of planning, technology,and could do some drawing.

They were grade 7 or 8 workers, and were allowedto work in department offices.This is part of what is meant by the 'triplecombination' (sanjie he).Apprentices

This is a 3 year training period for skilled workers.IDuring thefirst year, they get 20¥, second year, 24¥, and thira year, 28¥.Afterthat,they are turned to regular workers (zhuan zzheng), and go to grade 1.These raises are give practically1automatically each year, unless an apprenticedoes terrible work, or has a political problem.

There are tests at theend of the period, but only the worst don't pass.

-2-

They also had workers called 'skilled workers' (shulian gong) whowere paid at grade l when they started, and after one year or so (theperiod was not fixed) they would be raised to grade 2.TThe differencebetween apprentices and these 'skilled' workers was years of age.'Theapprentices were primary and middle school graduates; young people who hadjust entered the plant.The 'skilled' workers were older and it was notfitting for them to be apprentices.  (The terms shulian gongren andjishu gongren can both be translated as 'skilled worker' and might lead to

Shulian implies being practiced in something, while jishuconfusion.means technically trained.So shulian might best be translated'skilled', while jishu might be rendered as 'technical worker'.)Temporary Workers

Temporary workers can be fired, get no union benefits, and only

'Registered' (zai ji) workers are a) temporary workersget 50% sick pay.who have been turned into permanent ones, and b)) workers transferred from otherplants, as in newly built plants.They can't be fired, and get at least60% of sick pay. while after 8 years, they get lo0%.

Temporary worker wages were about the level of a grade l or 2 worker,but most were around grade 2 level.Some up to the level of a grade 4 or 5 worker.These last were workers who had transfered from other plants to try out ontemporary basis to see if they really have skills.There are very few of these.Temporary workers are recruited by the labor bureau of the city for informant'splant.:Plant cadres notify the labor bureau of how many workers they need,and the labor bureau looks through the registration rollsSand assigns workersas needed.Some of the temporary workers sign contracts specifying payand duration of service.Butinformantisnotclearonthedistinctionbetween temporary and contract labor.There were very few temporary workersin the plant, lesss than 100 in a total plant of 2700.

Before l966, they had temporary workers, but during the CR they rebelledand then the center sent a document saying theycould hire no new temporaryworkers. New workers had to be registered, permanent ones.  But they main-tained their leftover group of temporary laborers. AAfter the CR when theyhired people on a temporary basis they called them 'family dependent'workers(jiashu).Thesewererelativesofworkersandstaffwhocame in and were paideven less than the original temporary workers.This was also a way to raisethe income of families--give the wife or son a job.These kinds of temporariesdid unskilled work--moving articles, sweeping and cleaning, etc.

Demobilized Soldiers.They built the plant in l958, and they neededworkers.So these demobilized soldiers were assigned to the factory.Theyhad no technical standards, so they very rarely got above grade 2. Around 30%of the workers in his plant were demobilized soldiers.Firings

They fired people who had killed others cduring the CR.Also ifyou had committed serious mistakes you could be fired, for example, forrepeated stealings despite warning. NNo one was ever fired for bad workin his factory.Nor were people's wages lowered for poor work. Occassionallyworkers can be give more difficult kinds of labor if their work is notup to standards.Also people can be transfered to their home villages ifthey make serious political mistakes.Bonuses

They had bonuses before the cultural reovlution. Every year, if theplant finished the plan, each person would get 2o¥ during the spring festival.

-3-Every month they appraised workers for bonuses if the entire plant finishedtheir quotas.They split into three grades, and 8o% of the workforce gotsome bonus.The highest was lo¥, then 7¥, and 5￥.SSeven Yuan was themost common.This took place in every office.If you were absent for morethan 4 days per month, there was no bonus, and if work was bad, no bonus.If you were punished for making an error--political, stealing, causingaccidents or making costly mistakes--no bonus.

Eachunitwasdifferentiatedwithinthe plant.Iftheentireplantlost money, none of the departments would get bonuses, but shops can if theyfinish their quotas.If the plant as a whole meets targets, then all thedepartments will get them, but shops will only get them if they meet their

Quotas--the two major ones were output (chan liang) and outputowm quetas.value(chanzhi).They also had targets for assortment (pin zhong)andprofit, but if you didn't meet these, it didn't matter.If you did meet them,you were just considered to have completed your tasks even better.AAssortmenttargets were the hardest to meet among these, because some things were harderto make,and profit was a bit easier to meet.

During the Cultural Revolution, they cancelled this bonus ssystemand changed to a system where every person got 5 per month, and each dayyou were absent they would dock your wages .20.(This must mean unexcusedabsences and excessive sick and personal leave).Around1975or 1976，afterDeng came back for the first time, they restored bonuses for less than oneyear.This time they used the pre-CR formula except there was more moneyinvolved--the assessment criteria and methods were the same as before.The highest was l5¥, middle l0¥, and lowest 8¥.When Deng fell in 1976,they cancelled the bonuses again.

In 1977,tthey restored bonuses once againby the time he left in May l977.

But this was a bit later then elsewherebecause this was Liaoning and Mao Yuanxin was in power there.TThey wentback to the system which had been cancelled a year earlier.They stillhad not started the wage readjustments when he left.Four cleans Movement:(3/7/80, 2.25 hrs.)

Early in l964, the four cleans work team of over 20 people came totheir plant.They were from several factories in Fushun city. The first thingthey did was to investigate the plant director and 3 vice-directors.Thenthey looked at the department level cadres.They had meetings where cadreswere to confess their errors.If they didn't confesss their past history theywould get in trouble because they could look into the files and check.

The things they were investigating included both recent mistakesand also historical problems, class background.

When they interrogated theinformant theyasked him about a brother of his whohadallegedly beenexecutedyears earlier for a political crime.Hesaidhedidn'tknowandhadlo+brothers of his owm, possibly they 9guy they referred to was a cousin--he hadso many relatives he didn't know.

They repeatedly asked him whether or nothis brother had been executed--they were lookingfor an expression of doubt onhis part. If he vacillated, then they would investigate himnandcrossexaminehimevenfurtherandmoree fiercely.

Thistookplaceeintheoffice.The work team members came to the office for interrogations, and took himaway to another room.

He hadquite a suspicious historical background.He had brothers in Taiwan and the USA, his father was a KMT military commanderand a landlord, another brother had studied in the US on a KMT scholarship,and his sister had been labelled a rightist in l957. In addition to historicalproblems of this sort, they were looking for petty corruption.

Results of the movement--they transferred one vice-party secretaryto another plant because they found he didn't get along with the Party secretary.

-4-There were two cases of corruption in the finance department.TThey also foundfour people in the departments with serious historical problems that previouslyhad gone unrecorded.

They sent these people down for labor.

Theyalsofounda few others with minor problems.

They told the Party Committee to handletheir cases as they saw fit .1In the middle of 1965 the work team was withdrawnon orders from Peking (it is possible that these dates are one year early).Cultural Revolution

In 1966, the red guard movement began..A group of 2o+ red guardsfrom the Peking Petroleum College came, and they called themselvesthe'Daqing Commune' (daqing gongshe).rhey organized meetings a said we should

They also aroused workers to organize into rebeloppose capitalist roaders.

It made the rounds to all the local plants

This group later left.group.in the petroleum ministry system.

Later workers began to organize into 'red worker rebel groups'((hongsegongren zaofan tuan).TThis was the first group, called hong gong lian forshort.:Later, they established a'revolutionary masses alliance committee',calledgelianffor short.They had relationss with factions of the same nameelsewhere in Fushun city.There was another faction organized by middleof the road people, called the 'grasp revolution, promote production faction'.These were people who were older workers, people of bad class backgroundwho didn't dare to rebel.

So they stuck close to work and continued at theirposts.

The gelian were the conservatives, they supported the Party secretary.Among tthem were a high proportion of party members, people of approved classbackgrounds, and people with good political records.They were the largestof the two factions.The hong gong lian were the rebels.The membershipwas'complex'.?These were people who were not trusted by the leadership.

Theydared to do things.

These were people who didn't take orders well, andyoung workers were heavily represented here.  1People with truly bad classbackground, like the informant, did not dare to rebel.:It was people ofmiddling class backgrounds or small problemss in their records or backgroundswho rebelled.  I repeats that it was complex.

A number of these rebels were cleaned out during the'cleaning of the

Among them were two who had killed people during theclass ranks' (campaign.CR， and they were dragged off to jail。There were also people ho had stolenthings.:Informant's own 'grasp revolution'group was considered the'unattached' group (xiaoyao pai).

At first, the rebels took out after the plant director to criticizeand struggle him.Theconservatives at first weren'tcritical， but supportedhim, and later saw that the director couldn't stay in power, and they beganto criticize him too..They also struggled people who were known to have badclass backgrounds.:Farmers, rich peasants, landlords, and people who hadbeen in the KMT government,army, or youth organizations.Theytookthesepeople and lined them up outside the plant gates, where they had to chant,"I've erred, I ask Chairman Mao's punishment, etc."

Workerscouldgivethema good slap across the face as they walked by if they felt like it.Theyalsohadcriticismandstruggleemeetingswiththeplantdirectorandwiththose people with bad histories.

They were put on a stage,chanted that theyhad committed crimes, asked for punishment from Mao and the revolutionarymasses. They were routinely beaten and roughed up during these meetings.There were two incidents where people were beaten to death, both workers.Both had minor historical problems and refused to talk under investigation.This was not at a meeting but just an isolated incident, and they were beatenmore fiercely the more they refused to talk.They both died.

-5-

The department headof thefinance department committedsuicide rightbefore he was to be struggled in a meeting. He committed suicide by hanginghimself from a tree. The Party secretary was also struggled, as were allplant-level leading cadres.:Part of the department head-levelcadres werestruggled also.

Who stood aside among these cadres?  First, there were those who hadbeen struggled against.

They stopped work but this was not called 'standing

Then there were those cadres who joined mass organi-aside' (kao bian zhan).zations.They were called 'revolutionary cadres'.Then there were those whowere left over--they 'stood aside'. At this time nobody did any work.  Duringa period of intense physical combat in l967 between factions, people didn'teven dare come to work.1All these organizations had guns.  Productioncompletely stopped for a period in 1967. But from the end of 1966 to 1968(september), at least some of the shops stopped working intermittently.

For seven months in the midst of all of this all cadres in the plantfrom the department level up just came to the factory and had study meetingsall day.Therewasabsolutelynoworkforthemtodo.They had to cometo the plant; but could not do any work.Later, almost all the cadres from thedepartments were sent down to do manual labor.They would leave onlyone ortwo behind in the offices to handle the work.His technicaldepartment hadonly onecadre left in it out of theoriginal 20.The 30or so workerswho did common drafting work, etc., stayed. No one took the place of themissing technical cadres. It took a long time to restore production.RevolutionaryCommittee

In l968 the PLA propaganda team built a 'great alliance', thenhelped to form the Revolutionary Committee, and left.The RC containedl) revolutionary cadres, 2) revolutionary masses, and 3) PLA. But thePLA didn't actually sit on the RC, they used the head of the securitydepartmentinstead.

The members after formation:

TheheadoftheRCwasaformervice-plant director, who was a party member.There were four vice-heads.One was the head of the security department. One was the head of the admini-stration department, and there was one mass representative.: from each

The other members were more mass representatives and revolutionaryfaction.cadres.

This leading group didn't work out.The chairman of the RC was formerlyon good terms with the plant director.The mass representatives didn't like him,SOthe leading group was split. TThen in 197o PLA representatives came againto clear up the situation.They took over the leadership of the RC and hadall the real power.Then they transferred the former head to another plantin the system, to a new plant being run by! the ministry in Langfang, Hebei.Later, a number of theeother cadres were transferedout of the plant toother leadership posts, like that of party secretary.FButatthistimetheleading cadres who had been struggled still hadn't been liberated, andwere still being struggled against regularly.

Production still wasn't fully restored.  The PLA men brought a gooddeal of power with them.When they gave orders, people listened, and themasses were afraid of them.:Starting in l970, shortly after they came,the cadres working in the shops gradually were transferred back to officework.  I was the first of 2 people sent back to the technical department in1970.

The PLA representatives left at the end of l97l.

Duringg the two years the PLA representatives were there, the formerplant director became the chairman of the RC, and 2 of the former vice directorsbecame vice-heads of the RC.(One other former vice-director had been transferred.

-6-There was also one vice-head of the RC from eachn mass faction, and 2 vice-heads.were also department heads (administration and security).

Also anumber of members of the RC were from among the masses and also cadres.All of the people in this standing committee of the RC were Party membersexcept for one of the mass representatives.

At this time, there was no Party Committee.This was re-establishedonly in l973.At that time the head of the RC died suddenly of an illness(he implies that it was from a beating he received during the CR). So thecity sent in four officials--a partyI secretary who was also to be the RChead, two vice-party secretaries who were to be vice-heads of the RC, andonemember of the partycommittee, who was also to be a vice-head of theRC.SSo power was effectively in the hands of the party.

Afterthe partycommittee was restored in l973, they also restored Party life and organiza-tion, the branch secretaries inI the shops, etc.Post-CR Administration(3/10/80, 2 hrs.)

The departmentsS were still there, but smaller, and combined togetherin related groups, called 'groups' (zu).

After the party committee wasre-established, they speeded the rate of return of cadresstotheofficesfromthe shop floor, and began to rebuild the former departmental structure.

The departments were changed to groups (zu), and the shops werechanged to"revolutionary leadership groups" instead of the former shopdirector's office, but in reality it was the same as the previous leadershipmethod.The departments were restored after l97l, and the shops were returnedto their former names too.AAt this time, many of the department heads werenewones.sSome were workers, some former rebels.While most departmentheads before the cultural revolution were now doing manual labor, newerand younger leaders were taking their place.?The leadership changed,there was no three in one combination.

(revolutionary leadership groupsiscgeming lingdao xiaozu).

But the situation in the workshops was different.They had a revol-utionary leadership group with mass representatives--workers, former rebels,and headed by the former shop director.The hea d off the group， and thevice-head, were half separated from production.The members who were workersjust came up for meetings, and were still production workers.Theheadsofthese groups were basically former shop directors or branch party secretaries.One would be the head,and the other vice-head.Besides these two leadersthere were also several full time office personnel in the shops.  Theyhad a technician, a statistician, a personnel clerk(renshi yuan), a materialsclerk (cailiao yuan), and a shop union head.

The revolutionaryleadershipgroupdidnot meet regularly.:It meta lot right after it was first established, at the time when the revolutionarycommittee was just established. But later it was as if they were abolishedwithout being formally declared abolished.They gradually stopped meeting:and all decisions were taken over by the head of the shop.Thesame was truefor the revolutionary committee of the plant as a whole. Even if they met

The members of the RC had no special qualificationsit wouldbeof nouse.nor did they have power.The head and vice-head of the RC could make decisionsby themselves.

They were the first party secretary and vice party secretary.This was true after the Party's organizational life (zuzhi shenghuo) wasrestored in l97l, at about the same time as the RC was established.

The gradual rebuilding of the departments returned a number of formercadres from shop floor labor to office jobs again.This caused an overallincrease in the number of cadres in the plant.

Before the cultural revolutionthey had about l40cadres, where afterwards they had about 2o0 formally designated

-7-cadre positions, and another 80-lo0 workers assigned informally, "borrowed"from shops.They were called 'black cadres' (hei ganbu).

Why did the

The old cadres were sent to manual labor, and new youngernumber increase?people from rebel organizations took their place as cadres in the offices.Laterthe cadre policy was implemented and the old onesreturned to their departments.

The new cadres were younger, tended to bee rebels, and didn't reallyhave qualifications to handle the work.1But they were very good at makingcriticisms, and at running political movements.When the old cadres returnedto their former units, they did not remove the newer ones.This is becausethereweremanyleaders at the center who viewed this as a restoration(fubi), and would not stand for the removal of the revolutionary cadresinaddition1 to the return of the old ones.

But the old cadres, after their return, still were afraid to work

They were aware that many people thought their returntoo well or too hard.was a restoration and feared criticism.So they worked slow and didn'tdotoo much.Also, the new cadres were unable to perform much of the requiredwork.So they had to add a number of these 'black cadres', or temporarycadres borrowed from shop workers, to take up the slack of unfinished work.The result was that the bureaucratic structure enlarged.

This outpaced thegrowth in the number of production workers. 1Before the CR, they had 2000workers, and during the l970s they increased to about 2600.

Buttherewere140 cadres before the CR, and about 2oo thereafter plus many more informally

They also had black cadres before the CR, theyattached temporary cadres.always had 'borrowed cadres'.

ButtheyincreasedinnumbergreatlyaftertheCultural Revolution.

.The workstyle of veterancadreschanged in two ways under theseconditions.

First, they tended to evade tasks in order not to be criticizedin movements for making mistakes in their work (ie sabotage).Second,theytended not to make decisions with the speed and assuredness that they didbefore.Generally speaking, they were afraid and tried to protect themselvesfrom criticism.It wascommonlysaid at the time that workers were the leadingclass and should climb up into the superstructure, so they were afraid tomake mistakes in their work..If they did, they would be criticized laterand their mistakes would'be used to proveethatthecadrescouldnothandlethings as well as the proletariat.Also, political currents6 were very unstable.One day Lin Biao is up, next down.One day the Gang of 4 is pushing a movement,and then later the leadership changes and says something different.  Theyjust couldn't be confident.

The temporary, or 'black' cadres were usually workers, and usually

The argument was that they were training new cadres from among theyoung.working class.They were usually suggested by a department director withwhomthe particular worker hadgood relations((guanxi).Then the departmenthead would notify the personnel department, and say that they didn't haveenough people to do their work and please transfer this person over.Theshopdirector involved has to appreve--even though he might need the worker.1Butif he refuses then he might disrupt his relations with the department head,and make it more difficult for him to get favors in the future.So often itis not wise to refuse.The whole process:is smoother if the guanxi is gooda±l the way around.?This is calledlgoinggthroughthebackdoor togeta transfer (from the worker's6 point of view)， and it is quite prevalent inChina.

who ended up cdoing most of the department's work?Veterancadres,usually of bad class backgrounds, who did not dare to do things badly orto refuse work.But people with good class backgrounds did refuse work,and could get away with it.But they stilldidn't work as hard or as well asbefore the CR.Before they wanted to work well, to be noticed so they could

-8-get promotions and raises.  1But afterwards, promotions were of no use becausethey did not come along with a raise in pay.Also, after the CR the former,professionally trained and supportive department head was no longer in office.

What of important issues, or difficult problems?How could the newer,less experienced cadres solve them?They would ask the expert veterans whatto do before making a decision.

But the others would have a certain"posture"(jiazi) thatt they were the department heads and no stinking intellectual needtell them what to do.sSo often they made bad decisions.

So despite thefact that there were moree cadres in the plant, proportionately, after theCultural Revolution, work efficiency was far lower.There had previouslybeen state regulations that they could not have more than 8% of total personnelin cadre jobs, but in later years they surpassed this figure. (Accordingtothe figures he gives, before the CR some 7% of the personnel were cadres,while afterwards ll.5% of the personnel were either cadres or 'black cadres'.)

The revolutionarycommittee made decisions aand sent down orders justliketheformer plant director's office.But therewasone bigdifference.The chairman of the RC was a party secretary whoalso had powers ofitheformer plant director in day to day operations.This is referred to as'unitary'((yiyuan hua) leadership.

Before the CR the Party secretary could

Before the party organization was restored thenot directly lead production.leader of the RC was in effect the combination of these two roles.Laterhe formally became so, after the party committee was restored.

(3/24/80, 2.5 hrs.)Workers'Management Committees

Thee'workersmanagement：committees'((gongren guanli qiye weiyuanhui)were established at the same time as the revolutionary committee.It was underthe revolutionary committee and the workers' congress (zhigong daibiao dahui),and called the'union'(gonghui）for short.SSo this is a subordinatecommittee.It is made up of veteran workers selected by the shop directors.The real power in the gong guanhui was held by the revolutionary committeehead or vice-head, who was concurrently head of thiscommittee.

The vice-headof this committee was the union head for the plant.

The union had been criti-cized and abolished.1Lateritwasrenamedthegong dai hui rather thansimply gonghui.

It was in effect the standingcommittee of the union (althoughthe leadership）was changed during the CR), and changed the name of the unionto gong dai hui, while the chairman of theeunioncommitteewasnolongercalled zhuxi but zzhuren.

The gongguan hui. was in fact a body which was convened irregularlywhen the chairman of the RC (who was also the first party secretary afterl973)wanted a technical innovation campaign, or wanted to criticize andreform irrational regulations.He would convene this committee to study theissue.

The workers'(congress still kept meeting after the CR, and the selectionmethod for delegates was known as deng e xuanjua（等额迭举），which meantthatthe final election list has the same number of nominees as positions.

You canthen check the name if you approve, or put an X if you disapprove and writein another.He says this is just a way of having the upper levels decide,since the write-in vote is never enough to get a person elected.

The nominees are chosen as follows.

The workers'(congress meets once

TheRCdecideshowa year at least.Delegates are selected once a year.many representatives can attend from each shop, and the departments eachget 2-5 representatives.Then the leading cadre will select the people andsend up their names.

The toplevels of leadershipthen approves or tellsthe lower-level leaders to change the name, after which they come up witha list of nominees.

-9-Union

Before the CR, the union handled propaganda and labor insurance.They also did this afterwards, and also led cultural activities.Beforethe CR it was a department level organ under the Party Committee.Afterthe CR, under the revolutionary committee for a short while and thenwent back to being under the party committee once it was re-established.The union just changed its name and the title of its leader (see above),andalsoaddedtheworker'sScommitteeforthefirsttimeaftertheCR.Not until after he left in l977did they revert tocallingthe uniongonghui, but they still called its leader zhuren.

The gong dai hui, orunion, was established the same time as the revolutionary committee.

Itwas madee up of a head, and several vice-heads.The head was a cadre,and the vice-heads and 4-5 other office workers were nonproduction cadres;

Before the CR there was a chairman, severalin effect full-time cadres.committeememberss(weiyuan), who could be workers or cadres, all withoutproduction posts.Post-1973 Po1itics

During the Pi Lin, Pi Kong campaign they just studied, and did notcriticize anyone who worked in the plant.

They criticized confucius a latharder than Lin Biao in Liaoning province.

中hey removed leaders from theArmy and from the provincial leadership; but no one from his factory.

Thesame was basically true for the Pi Deng campaign, where they criticized theadverse current (huichao) of bonuses, and management systems.

But again,no individuals were criticized in the 1plant.There were no major effortsduring this period to elevate workers to cadre positions.  This happenedimmediatelyY after the CR but there were no great efforts thereafter.

After the Gang of Four was knocked down, the two vice-heads of therevolutionarycommittee who originally were mass:faction representatives wereimmediately sent back to do workers' jobs.They did not abolish the RCbefore he left.?There were aalso a number of leading cadres from the departmentwho had been promoted since the cultural revolution who were sent back tothe shops to become workers once again.The older cadres who had becomeworkers for a whileduringg the CR, and who had gone back to become regulartechnicians in shop or department offices afterc the implementation of thecadres party policy, were once again placed in leading positions in theirdepartments.

There was a lot of mild criticism (piping) during this period,but not serious criticisms (pipan).Decentralization within the Ministry after the CulturalRevolution

The ministry leadership and bureau heads were seriously struggledduring the Cultural Revolution, and the work of the system in effect stopped.So the six plants under his bureau were sent down (xia fang) to the localmunicipal leadership.Theyy'simplified the structure'of the ministerialsystem, as the slogan of thetime went.

The concrete meaning of xiafang in this6 context--the ministry stillarranged for the parts, raw materials, and supplies, they still determinedthe products and the targets, and the products were still sent to the bureau.Personnel matters were still handled by the ministry, both cadres and workers.This work was still handled by the bureau staff. The Party Centre, particu-larly Mao, raised the suggestion of simplifying the structure.ZhouEnlai,and Yu Qiuli, the head of the petroleum ministry, opposed this gutting ofthe ministries. zAlso the plant directors opposed, because if the ministrieswere crippled it made it very difficult to get supplies and parts.

What did the localities manage if all of this was still handledby the ministries? First, the party committee chairman of the locality

-10-directly led the revolutionary committee of the plant, whereas the Partycommittee of the ministry or bureau led them earlier. Also, the Citycould borrow personnel from the plant offices, as was the case when theinformant went to work for the Fushun Municipal Planning Commission forawhile.

But his own plant was not in reality sent down to the locality.Some were, and in these cases they were really managed by a municipalindustrial bureau, or a provincial industrial bureau.  But his plantdid not revert to local control because Yu Qiuli was formerly theminister of the Oil Industry, and was now vice-minister.zZhouEnlaiwas premier. Neither really supported the xiafang, so they dragged theirfeet in the important oil ministry. Kang Shi'en at that time was theMinister of Oil. He also supported Zhou and Yu, and opposed this kindof xiafang. They could get away with this because the oil industry was akey one, and was also very profitable.

-11一

描述：

