id: e47268220d
标题：Hong Kong Interviews: Informant No. 49
日期：1980-5-28
是否是时间段：false
作者：Andrew G. Walder
来源：
标签：文章
书籍：Hong Kong Interviews: Informant No. 49
书籍作者：Andrew G. Walder

正文：
INFORMANT NO.49PERSONAL DATA

Sex:MaleAge:40Education:Technical school graduate

21Total Years Relevant Experience:Last Year of Relevant Experience: l979

Year Left China:1979Initial Immigration Status:Legal

unknownNative Place/Overseas Connections:Class Background/Political Designation:

unknown

OCCUPATIONAL HISTORYSUMMARYPositions Held: l) Technician, Sugar Plant, Henan, 1959-65

2) Staff technician and Department Head, Sugar and Paper

Factory, Guangxi, 1965-79Administrative Level of Work Unit/(No. of employees);

1)County/(300-500 fluctuated by season)

2) County/(500)Experience in Full-time Manual Labor (for non-worker occupations);

none mentioned

TOTAL HOURS:

2

PAGES TEXT:APPOINTMENTS:

31No. 49Occupational History (5/28/80, 2 hrs.)

The informant studied at a middle-school level technical school inGuangdong, and after graduation in l959 was sent to a sugar factory whichwas being built in Xinyang, Henan.  It had about 300-5o0 employees, andwas still under construction.  1He was age l9 at the time.Hewasanassistant technician.He worked on the construction of this plant for 3years until l962 when they decided that they would no longer need theplant, at which time they abandoned it (xiama). So he was transferedto a wine factory of about 2oo employees under the same county administration.While he was there for 3 years, he did work in the shops, just about anykind of technical work needed, from repairs to testing.

In l965, he requested to be transfered back to Guangxi (along withhis wife, who originally was from Guangxi and worked as an accountant in thesame plant)， because he and his wife could not stand the cold weather inHenan.In l965 he was sent to the Sugar and Paper Factory in Laibin,Guangxi， a small county seat. The plant was under county administration andhad around 5oo workers, althoughithe labor force fluctuated by season.He did office work in the Production and Technical Section (gu)， beingthe department head for a period, until he left legally for Hong Kong,with his wife, in 1979.Wages

His first year after graduation he was on practicum (jianxi) and made29￥.After being made regular in the next year, he was promoted to assistanttechnician，36¥.]In l963, after transferingtoGuangxi，hewasraisedtograde l5 on the technical cadre scale, a raise of a few dollars.They hada readjustment for workers then, too, a small pereentage.In 1972, therewas a large readjustment of about 40%, this was completely according to paylevel and years of service.They set up years lines.1If you had workedsince l957 and were still grade 3, they raised you to four. If you enteredbefore 1965, and were still a 2, they raised you to 3, and if you enteredbefore l97o and were still grade l, you were raised to grade 2. He wasgiven a riase in l972.

In l977-78 they had another wage readjustment, and he was raised tograde 13， 52¥.This was based in part on years of service.They had a seriesof meetings assessing workers work contribution, skill, attitude, which tookplace in small group meetings after work for over 2 months, 3 times a week.

People of course argued at these meetings--"how can you say I don'tdeserve it? How about you?!"This kind of stuff went on.The problem wasthat the masses hadn't been asked before to assess themselves for raiseslike this, so there were some arguments and dissatisfactions.:Later theyinstituted a testingg system for skills to eliminate some of the arguing,the endless hagglinganddiscussion.That way you either made it or not,and there were no questions.Right as they were coming to Hong Kong, theyhad begun propaganda for the 1979 raises for another 40% of the work force.This time there would be no year lines, it was to be purely by merit.Bonuses

Before l965, they had bonuses. Monthly. quarterly, and year-end.About 80% of the workers got them, and they assessed in small group meetingsand sent names up for winnowing through.Theysplit monthly bonuses into3 grades--6,4, and 3¥.They revived bonuses in l975, before the Gang ofFour fell, in order to increase worker enthusiasm.  At first the bonuses

-1-were split into 3 grades, and small like before.They were not really openabout it. But after l977 it became more open, and the amount increased up to20¥ for the top monthly bonus, but varied according to the plant's incomeduring the current period.

Before the CR they had monthly bonuses for a while in his unit, butthey were spending too much time discussing and arguing about them, so theydecided to do it only quarterly.  So the highest was 2l¥, the lowest aboutl0￥.The 'end of the year bonus' (nianzhong jiang） was simply the lastquarterly bonus of the year--a name change.

After l977, they had monthly assessments in small groups.They dis-cussed work contribution, attendance, and attitude. If a plant had monthlybonuses, they didn't have quarterly bonuses. These are alternatives,not types that can coexist. The same with year-end bonuses. Now this isjust the name for the bonus at the end of December.TThey just call itsomethingdifferent.Discipline, Firings

They had firings, they fired a person in l978 for buying watches onthe black market, doing trade in ration tickets, coming lateiand not showingup for work. So this guy was fired and later went to work in a county-runcollective factory. They remember him very clearly. lHe was the only personthey saw fired in 2o years.BHe was a really bad person, he always cursed atpeople.?There were a number of steps they went through first but they didn'twork. They gave him education, criticized in groups, gave warnings, butnone of this worked.Now no other state-run factory in Guangxi will hirehim.Contract and Temporary Workers

Their factory's work (sugar and paper) was very seasonal， so theyhired a lot of seasonal workers (jigong)in the plant.Their factory employedcontract workers and seasonal workers both.The contract workers were long-term, usually worked for 2-5 years. Each contract was for 2 years, and theymade about 40+¥ a month. While they are in the plant, their insurance andwelfare are about the same as permanent workers.FButtheystillgot theirgrain rations from the communes， not from the work unit.And they had to paypart of their wages to their commune to get this grain.

The plant's busiest time was from October to March, when the sugarharvest comes in.They bring in seasonal workers from the surrounding communesfor these months eachyear.They still go through the labor bureau forapproval, and they get about the same wages as the contract workers (@40).While they are in the.plant, insurance and welfare is about the same asregular workers.But they still get their grain from the commune.Factory Work Experience, 1965-79

While in the Production and Technology Section (shengchan jishu gu), hedid designing, repair and inspection of machinery.  All year round they madepaper from the leftover sugar cane stalks and grass from the communes.Inthe winter they made refined white sugar from the cane.They hada sugarrefining shop, a machine repair shop, and an electrical generation shop.

Jobs in the production office were not very specialized.  They did alittle quality inspection, machinery maintenance inspection, and if there wasa major problem that caused production to stop, they had to come and inspectbefore they could decide whether or not to authorize the machine shop torepair it.

-2-

He was the section head, and his job was to give directions to theother lo people in the section.(Other technicians in the section haddifferent specialfies--electronics, chemistry, wines, machinery.Thesection leader's job was to lead meetings with all his people and decidewhat production problems there were. Afterwards he would attend meetingswith the leading cadres and with other section heads and shop directorsto report.

Before the CR, they had a plant director's office, while after the CR,they had a revolutionary committee.The members of the RC were elected inl969 by the masses, not re-elected afterwards.  The elections were a showof hands, and they also used ballots.The upper levels had to approve ofthe outcome.The head of the RC was the party secretary, and was named bythe above levels. Four members of the RC were shop directors or sectionheads, and there were also 2 mass representatives, workers. During theCR they did not change anything about the structure except the leading group,the RC.They did not change the sections or reduce their number.Cultural Revolution

During the 3 years of the CR the leadership of the plant was paralyzed.During the CR, about 80% of the leading cadres stood aside, but in the endthey all 'stood up' after it was over.Thoseonwhomthemassesopinionswere very severe were simply transfered to another plant at the end of the CR.

They had two factions in the plant, and there were also two in all ofGuangxi.Their plant was under the influence of the provincial capital,Nanning.All the units had factions in them.In l967-68 the factions werearmed and there was fighting on the streets--they had guns. There was nofighting inside the plant, but since the plant's factions were aligned withother organizations in the cities, they ran off to join the fighting inLiuzhou, Wuzhou, and Nanning.This was very severe, and production stoppedcompletely for 6 months, and recovered only gradually thereafter.

The plant recovered from its factionalism only slowly. It took manyyears but gradually it went away bit by bit. The only way they could organ-ize a 'great alliance' was to bring in PLA representatives and worker propa-ganda teams.They organized meetings and got the groups to settle theirdifferences.Finally in l969 they established a revolutionary committee,but began trying in l968, It took a long time. All the PLA representativeshad left by l97l, but they left gradually， one by one.

The workers on the propaganda team were workers from a big miningbureau nearby.They all came from units outside the plant.They had twogoals--to investigate the leading cadres history, get workers to studyand unite.  If leaders had a bad history, they stood aside.

After the Gang of 4 fell, the biggest change was in wages and bonuses.There were no changes in the leading group.There were no elections.  Leadershave always been named from above.

-3-

描述：

