id: 539776209e
标题：Some Terminological Questions Regarding Class Struggle in the Socialist Period
日期：1979-1-3
是否是时间段：false
作者：胡乔木
来源：中央文献研究室, 三中全会以来重要文件选编, 38-42
标签：康生,胡乔木,文章
书籍：Some Terminological Questions Regarding Class Struggle in the Socialist Period
书籍作者：胡乔木

正文：
# Some Terminological Questions Regarding Class Struggle in the Socialist Period

3 January 1979

Hu Qiaomu

Currently, ideological and theoretical work is located in an important historical period. Due to the long-term interference of Lin Biao and the “Gang of Four,” [we] need to continue to cleanse some outdated ways of speaking. We should have sufficient courage in our theory to raise problems and resolve them. We should have foresight in order to see in which direction the historical conditions we are in will develop, so as to make our ideological and theoretical work meet the demands of historical development. Regarding the formulations of some major theoretical questions, we should continue engaging in discussion and analysis in order to clarify their objective meaning and scientific content.

For example, what does the slogan “continuation of the revolution under the dictatorship of the proletariat”[1] actually mean, what is its scientific foundation, is it good or not to continue using it, all of these are worth studying again. It’s not only a theoretical problem, but also a practical problem. This slogan was not originally coined by comrade Mao Zedong, but by the clique of the “Gang of Four.” The first time it was publicly seen in written form was in the article “Advance Along the Road Opened up by the October Socialist Revolution,”[2] written in 1967 by the editorial department of “Two Newspapers One Magazine.”[3] Later, Kang Sheng included this slogan in the political report of the Ninth Party Congress, and when transmitting the spirit of the Ninth Party Congress to the cadres from centrally affiliated organs[4] he also elaborated on it. Since this slogan was coined, there have been many articles published [on it] in the press. But this slogan has never been rigorously thought through and its scientific content and basis has never been made clear. Lenin points out that, “The key question of every revolution is undoubtedly the question of state power.”[5] If one generally speaks about political revolution, it always refers to overturning a ruling class and seizing political power. This slogan was propounded at the high point of the Cultural Revolution, and it was linked with the contemporary practice of “seizing power from capitalist roaders.” It also has a significant relationship to the later reactionary formula of “Old Cadres = Democratic Faction = Capitalist Roaders.” The clique of Lin Biao and the “Gang of Four” made use of this slogan, doing their utmost to blur the boundary between revolution and counterrevolution, and manufacturing a whole set of theories about completely seizing power from the proletariat. Following the smashing of the “Gang of Four,” the slogan has still been disseminated. But what it actually means remains a question. This slogan relates to how to appraise the present and future class struggle, and it also relates to how to explain the theory of how to correctly handle contradictions among the people.[6] According to the theory of how to correctly handle contradictions among the people, class struggle (irrespective of whether or not it is classified as a contradiction among the people) can be completely handled correctly. Is this correct handling to be called “continuing revolution”? Henceforth, this kind of vague slogan might yet become a destabilizing factor in real life. Clarifying this question is significant for Party theory and practice, for the Chinese revolution, and for the international communist movement. What measures should be taken to clarify this issue needs to be considered, and at least for the time being must not be discussed in newspapers and magazines.

Understanding the form and function of class struggle in the socialist period is also an important theoretical problem in urgent need of resolution. In the Tenth Plenum of the Eighth Central Committee, comrade Mao Zedong said: “In this historical period of socialism, classes, class conflict, and class struggle still exist, the struggle between two roads of socialism and capitalism still exists, and the risk of capitalist restoration still exists.”[7] This formulation was later twisted and distorted by the clique of Lin Biao and the “Gang of Four”. The general principles of the Party Constitution revised at the “Ninth Party Congress” under Kang Sheng’s guidance also adopted this formulation, which says that in socialist society “in this historical period, classes, class conflict, and class struggle will always exist.” Comrade Mao Zedong never used the word “always.”[8] This word was added by Kang Sheng. Adding this changed comrade Mao Zedong’s words beyond recognition, and did not make sense logically. Lenin stated that: “Socialism means the abolition of classes.”[9] If one says in socialist society that classes and class struggle always exist, then how can classes be abolished and how can one enter communism? Wouldn’t that be tantamount to saying that socialism is never socialism, or that socialism in which classes have been abolished can never be realized? This erroneous formulation of “always existing” urgently needs to be corrected, and is also very easy to correct. However, [it] must be formally decided by the Party Center, [and] certain procedures adopted to properly handle its official correction.

Within what scope and under which conditions does class struggle exist in socialist society? Is it the driving force in the development of socialist society, or can it always act as the driving force? What role does it ultimately play in social progress? Doesn’t struggle for production and scientific experimentation also contribute to social progress? What is the relationship between the struggle for production and class struggle? These problems all require that we again have a serious, fact-oriented and scientific debate.

As another example, how should we understand “taking class struggle as the key link”? This formulation depends on the sense and ambit in which it is used to be meaningful. If we don’t make this clear, it might give rise to confusion in ideology and practical work. People might believe that only as long as there are remaining forms of class struggle can this kind of struggle still be a driving force propelling society forward. This will certainly result in an artificial exaggeration of class struggle. Furthermore, according to this line of reasoning, if society at some point eliminates class, it loses the basis for taking class struggle as the key link. Social development accordingly seems to have no key link, no driving force; or suddenly another contradiction arises and replaces it, becoming the key link and driving force. This is a fundamental question involving historical materialism. It certainly should be given a scientific explanation.

At the Second Plenum of the Seventh Central Committee,[10] Comrade Mao Zedong proposed that the contradiction between the working class and the bourgeoisie had become the principal domestic contradiction. But is this contradiction still the principal contradiction after the basic completion of socialist transformation? “On the Correct Handling of Contradictions among the People” never said this; it regards the contradictions between forces of production and relations of production as the basic contradiction of socialist society. After 1966, under the pretense of grasping the principal contradiction and the main guiding principle,[11] Lin Biao and the “Gang of Four” opposed socialist construction, and the shift in core party work to realizing the Four Modernizations. The confusion regarding this matter should now no longer be continued.

A problem related to class struggle is the issue of Party development, the issue of Party history. Are the struggles within the Party all reflections of class struggle in society? Are they all line struggles? Is Party history only the history of line struggles? “People’s Daily” has already published articles on these points, and it is very important that this issue has been raised. It is a fact that line struggles exist within the Party. However, the history of the Party does not only amount to a history of line struggles. If every struggle is a line struggle, then line struggles exist within the party practically every day. The situation of inner-party struggles is very complex. Should we really designate every instance of struggle as a line struggle, and must they be lined up one after the other? Is this not an over-simplification of a complex phenomenon, and besides, will it not lead to many far-fetched arguments? Over a long period of time, such a mentality has taken hold among some comrades; it seems that if an inner-party struggle doesn’t reach the height of a line struggle, it has no real significance; just as if they eat but never get full, and are never satisfied. This kind of habit in thinking about issues was formed in a certain historical period, and has had severe repercussions on life within the Party.[12] Because everyone believes that when someone commits a line error then everything about this person is wrong, this amounts to announcing a political death sentence. For a period of time this was for all intents and purposes almost the same as being a counterrevolutionary, which created a tense and abnormal state of affairs within the Party. Is this simplistic formulation ultimately necessary to the development of the Party? Is it ultimately beneficial? Does it ultimately correspond with reality? Certainly this also must be scientifically examined according to the principle that practice is the sole criterion for testing truth,[13] otherwise we cannot justify ourselves. Marx, Engels, and Lenin all engaged in more than a few inner-party struggles in their lifetimes. But they never said how many line struggles they had engaged in, nor did others speak in such ways, because there is no need to classify and count like this. Is it really necessary that in the future we continue to simplify all complex inner-party struggles into certain rigid patterns?

In sum, there are still many questions which need to be studied and discussed again. We really have to make Marxism-Leninism and Mao Zedong Thought crystal clear, and uphold its comprehensive and rigorous system of scientific thought. This is of great significance to achieving our overall tasks in this new period.

Above are just some of my personal opinions. I have put them forward for comrades’ reference; I invite everyone to criticize and rectify anything incorrect.

Note: These are the main points of a speech made by comrade Hu Qiaomu at a meeting of the Central Propaganda Department. It was printed and distributed at an ideological meeting of theoretical Party work.

Translated by Zhu Canran and the Maoist Legacy Project team

[1] By the Editorial Departments of Renmin Ribao, Hongqi and Jiefangjun Bao, “Advance along the Road Opened up by the October Socialist Revolution—In Commemoration of the 50th Anniversary of the Great October Socialist Revolution,” Peking Review, No. 46, November 10, 1967, p. 5.

[2] By the Editorial Departments of Renmin Ribao, Hongqi and Jiefangjun Bao, “Advance along the Road Opened up by the October Socialist Revolution—In Commemoration of the 50th Anniversary of the Great October Socialist Revolution”, Peking Review, No. 46, November 10, 1967, pp. 9-11, 14-16.

[3] This was a phrase used during the Cultural Revolution. “Two newspapers” refers to People’s Daily (Renmin Ribao) and Liberation Army Daily(Jiefangjun Bao), while “one magazine” refers to Hongqi.

[4] Kang Sheng, April 14, 1969, “Chairman Mao coined the doctrine of permanent revolution under the condition of proletarian dictatorship and the doctrine of periodical permanent revolution” 《康生在中共九大的发言》. Kang Sheng, May 23, 1969, “Chairman Mao makes a great contribution to Marxism. He clearly pointed out that, in the whole socialist historical period, class struggle exists. The proletarian dictatorship has a consolidated foundation” 《康生陈伯达在中央直属机关传达“九大”大会上的讲话》, 中国文化大革命文库。

[5] “One of the Fundamental Questions of the Revolution,” Lenin’s Collected Works, Progress Publishers, 1977, Moscow, Volume 25, pp. 370-377. First published in Rabochy Put No. 10, 27 (14) Sept, 1917.

[6] “On the Correct Handling of Contradictions among the People,” Speech at the Eleventh Session (Enlarged) of the Supreme State Conference in February 27, 1957, Selected Works of Mao Zedong, Vol. V. Mao Zedong made certain additions to the verbatim record before its publication in the People's Daily on June 19, 1957.

[7] “Now then, do classes exist in socialist countries? Does class struggle exist? We can now affirm that classes do exist in socialist countries and that class struggle undoubtedly exists. Lenin said: After the victory of the revolution, because of the existence of the bourgeoisie internationally, because of the existence of bourgeois remnants internally, and because the petit bourgeoisie exists and continually generates a bourgeoisie, therefore the classes which have been overthrown within the country will continue to exist for a long time to come and may even attempt restorations. ... We must acknowledge that classes will continue to exist for a long time. We must also acknowledge the existence of a struggle of class against class, and admit the possibility of the restoration of reactionary classes.” Speech At The Tenth Plenum Of The Eighth Central Committee, Selected Works of Mao Zedong, Vol. VIII, https://www.marxists.org/reference/archive/mao/selected-works/volume-8/mswv8_63.htm（“那末，社会主义国家有没有阶级存在？有没有阶级斗争？现在可以肯定，社会主义国家有阶级存在，阶级斗争是肯定存在的.列宁曾经说，革命胜利后，本国被推翻的阶级，因为国际上有资产阶级存在，国内还有资产阶级残余，小资产阶级的存在，不断产生资产阶级，因此，被推翻了的阶级还是长期存在的，甚至要复辟的。... 要承认阶级长期存在，承认阶级与阶级斗争，反动阶级可能复辟。” 《学习文选》，1967，《毛泽东思想万岁》，中文版，1968）

[8] The word for “always” is “shi zhong” (始终).

[9] Lenin, October 30, 1919, “Economics and Politics in the Era of the Dictatorship of the Proletariat,” Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1965, Volume 30, pp. 107-117.

[10] The Second Plenum of the Seventh Central Committee was held March 5-13, 1949 in Xibaipo, Hebei.

[11] “The principal contradiction” refers to the contradiction between classes, and “the guiding principle” refers to class struggle.

[12] Inner-party life is also mentioned as “the regular activities of the organization of the Party.” Chen Yun, “Improving Inner-Party Life,” April 22, 1947. Regular activities of the organization of the Party usually refer to the general membership meeting of a party organization, the party group meeting and the democratic life meeting in the party: “Every Party member, irrespective of position, must be organized into a branch, cell or other specific unit of the Party to participate in the regular activities of the Party organization and accept oversight by the masses inside and outside the Party. Leading Party cadres must attend democratic meetings held by the Party committee or leading Party members' group. There shall be no privileged Party members who do not participate in the regular activities of the Party organization and do not accept oversight by the masses inside and outside the Party.” Chapter I, Article 8, Constitution of CPC (revised), November 14, 2012.

[13] Lilun Dongtai, No. 60, May 10, 1978.

描述：

