id: d3d276aa3f
标题：Hong Kong Interviews: Informant No. 29
日期：1980-4-10
是否是时间段：false
作者：Andrew G. Walder
来源：
标签：文章
书籍：Hong Kong Interviews: Informant No. 29
书籍作者：Andrew G. Walder

正文：
INFORMANT NO. 29PERSONAL DATA

Sex: MaleAge:35

lower middle schoolEducation:Total Years Relevant Experience:

10Last Year of Relevant Experience: l972

Year Left China:unknown

probably legalInitial Immigration Status:

Shanghai native/os ties unknownNative Place/Overseas Connections:

unknownClass Background/Political Designation:

OCCUPATIONALHISTORYSUMMARYPositions Held:1) Rubber Factory, Shanghai, 1963-72

a)worker, 1963-65

b)group 1eader, 1966-72Administrative Level of Work Unit/(No. of employees):

1) unknown, probably Municipal/(1000-2000)

PAGES TEXT: 3APPOINTMENTS:1

TOTAL HOURS:2No. 29Occupational History(4/l0/80, 2 hrs.)

The informant worked in a medium-sized (lo00-2oo0 worker) rubberfactory in Shanghai from l963-72, first as a worker, later as a productiongroup leader for 7 years.  BHestartedworkinl963aftergraduationfroma lower

middle school.Then he started part-time study, part-timework at this factory.

He worked four days a week as a worker, and wentto a technical middle school 2 days a week.The system was designedass a four-year process where afterwards it was possible to be raised

He was a grade l worker at the time, and was neverto assistant technician.given a raise during his entire time in the plant. This was because duringthe CR the wage readjustments, which had earlier come once every threeyears, stopped.He does remember a readjustment in l97l or 1972, andnow that he mentions it, he remembers he did get a raise then, but can'tremember clearly. He did not pay much attention to wages then, but hedoes remember now that he was given a raise during this readjustment.SmallGroup Management

He worked in a small group, and was the group leader for a total ofseven years, after having worked a little over two years in the group as aworker.He was promoted over lo old masters (lao shifu) who had been workingsince before l956, and some as early as pre-liberation, and their wageswere80¥.The promotion was decided from above, by the shop director(or branch partyI secretary), and approved by the plant.director, aftertalking over his abilities with the old masters.They also had a largenumber of apprentices， about 4-5 in a ggroup which totaled about 20 workers.This was a three-year apprenticeship period, l8 the first year, 2o¥ thesecond, and 22¥ the third. Then they would be promoted to grade l workerat 42¥， and grade 2 worker at 49¥.The rest of the people in the groupwere regulr workers.

They had a group leader (himself) who was appointed right before theCR started. A group0leader for study was the Party member who led the smallgroup in political study.

(The implication here is that he was the leaderfor production, while this party member led study, but it is likely theinformant was also a Party member, which may account for his extremenervousness and suspiciousness).Before the CR political study was heldirregularly. about once a week.During the CR they had it every eveningafter work.

Theyhadthe'8 personnel'ssystem in the small group before the CR,but not during or after the CR.He remembers that they had a personin charge of quality inspection, who checks the work of 6everyone and bringsup problems at group meetings.

There was also a person who managedlivelihood (shenghuo yuan), whose job was to get soap and towels everyweek to give to the workers. He can't remember too much about this systembecausee they stopped using it so soon after he started work.You can'treally say the system was abolished. There was no rule saying you had toabolish it. Generally the group leader would be responsible, and everyonein the group would be responsible in a general way.YYou can't really

Workers would still do the same kinds ofsay the system 'changed'.things to help the group leader, but they just did it as the group leaderordered, and there was no fixed person responsible for a certain job.

They had meetings for 30-60 minutes after each shift.This includedboth production problems and the study of Mao thought.They could alsobring up production problems.  TThelengthof themeetingdependedontheday's needs.

-1-

As group leader, he engaged in production, but moved around the groupto do whatever needed to be done, wherever hands were short. Usually keyjobs in the group.As group leader,he did all the work assignments.If someone was on leave, he would assign someone to switch jobs and taketheir place. Generally, they did the same work every day, and the groupstasks were decided by above levels.

Every day they had to fill out production reports, after working hours,andsendthemto0 the shop office. He didn't do this, he appointed a youngworker to do this, an unofficial 'statistician' (tongji yuan), to figureup these things after work hours. They did not do the inspection for quality

The goods were sent to the packaging (baozhuang)departmentin the group.and they next day they would then be inspected by this department.

There were no strict regulations and rules, they just did thingsaccording to what was effective, and they decided in the small group whatwas effective.They often hadcadres in teh group whoaid manual laboron a rotating basis, and worked along with the workers.Bonuses

They had a bonus system for overfulfilling quotas, based on output,quality, and attendance.

They didn't assess for bonuses within the smallgroup before the CR.According to the output, quality of the group's workfor the month, the entire group would be givenanamount of moneyforbonuses to be split up equally among all members of the group, with deduc-tions for days absent.  The group leader gets the same wage and same bonusas everyone else. He does not remember any supplements or changes in wagesuntil the readjustment of l97l-72.Cultural Revolution

Their factory was not disrupted very much during the cultural revolution.The biggest influence on their production came from outside--the dryingupof orders and the scarcity of raw materials.There were not really twofactions in the plant, and no armed struggle.There were a lot of cadressent down to do manual labor in the shops, and they did stints of varyinglengths (vague about this), and then they returnea eventually to leadinggroups.In the meantime, a number of new cadres were promoted from amongthe workers and youth who were activists and faction leaders.1But not allthe original cadres returned to the leading group.Some were sent to theshops to be either cadres or workersS(again, very vague on this).

He can't remember when the revolutionary committee was formed.Heis very vague about PLA representatives, but he does Say that they had them.There were no elections for the RC, they were just selected as were theleading groups from before.The old ptant director was the RC chairmanand the PLA representative helped him run the factory.The PLA people wereall party members.The members of the RC were activists and leaders duringthe CR--workers.They also had several middle-level cadres, and the PLArepresentatives.He doesn't really know how they led production, and hehad no time to pay attention to that kind of thing.They were so busy tryingto keep up with production tasks at that time.Worker's Congresses

At first, he doesn't remember this name, then he remembers dimly thatthey had this before the CR.TThe good workers were selected to participate.He does not remember how often they met, but it was related to work andwork activism.

-2-TechnicalEducation

They had a formal system of technical study classes before the Ck, butit stopped during the CR.  After the CR the only technical teaching theygot was informally when technicians came down to the groups to participatein manual labor.(Generally, the informant is reluctant to talk about each topic I introduce,and suspicious of my motives for asking, and obviously scared to death ofpolitical matters. It is best to end here.)

一3一

描述：

